CZECHS APPEAL FOR EU HELP WITH RADIO FREE EUROPE AFTER TRUMP CUTS

The Czech Republic is pushing for EU support to keep Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) running after the Trump administration
cut funding for the global broadcaster.

Foreign Minister Jan Lipavsky said RFE/RL, based in Prague, "is one of
the few credible sources in dictatorships like Iran, Belarus, and
Afghanistan".

In Eastern Europe, the US government-funded outlet reached millions of
listeners during the Cold War, helping to spread democratic values
while communist authorities tightly controlled local media.

Elon Musk, in charge of cost-cutting under Donald Trump, dismissed
RFE/RL as "radical left crazy people talking to themselves while
torching $1B/year of US taxpayer money".

But RFE/RL's president and CEO Stephen Capus said axing the
broadcaster's grant agreement "would be a massive gift to America's
enemies".

"The Iranian Ayatollahs, Chinese communist leaders, and autocrats in
Moscow and Minsk would celebrate the demise of RFE/RL after 75 years,"
he added.

Mr Capus's concern was echoed by the independent Committee to Protect
Journalists (CPJ), which complained that thousands of journalists
would be hit by the US funding cut - and that some working in censored
countries were already "in grave danger".

RFE/RL says it reaches a weekly audience of nearly 50 million people
in 23 countries, including Russia, Ukraine, Iran, Afghanistan and
ex-Soviet republics in Central Asia and the Caucasus.

Czech foreign minister Mr Lipavsky told the BBC he was working on
building a "platform of countries" to support the station, but added
that they "need to be very careful and mindful of the USA, which has
this operation on their side".

"We will try to do everything to keep this organization with 75 years
of legacy afloat," he said.

RFE/RL, Radio Free Asia and Voice of America (VOA) have relied for
decades on funding from the US Agency for Global Media (USAGM).

President Trump signed an executive order on Friday to cut their
funding after Musk had scorned them on X, saying "shut them down".

The move contrasts with the media policies of authorities in Russia,
China and Iran, who have poured funding into their state broadcasters
to counter the impact of Western liberalism around the world.

Most of VOA's full-time staff have been put on administrative leave
and the broadcaster's contractors, who dominate the non-English
language services, have been laid off, the AFP news agency reports.
