SECOND NIGHT OF PROTEST BREAKS OUT IN ISTANBUL DESPITE BAN

SECOND NIGHT OF PROTEST BREAKS OUT IN TURKEY DESPITE BAN

Police in Istanbul have used tear gas and rubber bullets against
demonstrators in a second night of disorder after the arrest of the
Mayor of Istanbul Ekrem Imamoglu - despite a four-day protest ban
being in place.

Imamoglu - a member of the secular Republican People's Party (CHP) and
a key rival of Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan - was set to be
named as a presidential candidate for the 2028 presidential elections
later this week.

On Wednesday, he was one of 106 people held on charges including
corruption and aiding terrorist groups.

Since then, authorities in Turkey have arrested dozens of people for
"provocative" social media posts.

Responding to the protests, Turkey's President Erdogan accused his
political opponents of theatrics for taking part in a second night of
demonstrations.

"They have lost the balance so much that they are in a state to attack
our police, hurl threats at judges, prosecutors," he said.

Addressing a crowd of demonstrators outside Istanbul's city hall,
Ozgur Ozel, the leader of Imamoglu's CHP party, accused the government
of attempting a "coup" and said people had the right to protest.

But government officials have criticised the opposition for calling
for demonstrations.

"Gathering and marching in protest are fundamental rights. But calling
to the streets over an ongoing legal investigation is illegal and
unacceptable," justice minister Yilmaz Tunc wrote online.

A message posted on Imamoglu's X account on Thursday called on Turkey
to "stand against this evil as a nation", and urged members of the
judiciary and of Erdogan's party to fight injustice.

"These events have gone beyond our parties, political ideals. The
process is now concerning our people, namely your families," Imamoglu
said. "It is time to raise our voices."

However, numbers of protesters are still relatively small for a city
with more than 16 million people. For now, they are unlikely to raise
political pressure on Erdogan to release Imamoglu.

Authorities must either release or charge Imamoglu by Sunday at the
latest.

The arrests of Imamoglu and others follow a major nationwide crackdown
in recent months, targeting opposition politicians, journalists and
figures in the entertainment industry.

Some fear more will be brought in for questioning over the coming
weeks as part of a campaign of intimidation.

Opposition figures say the arrests are politically motivated. But the
justice ministry on Wednesday criticised those who linked Erdogan to
the arrests, and insisted on their judicial independence.

Imamoglu won a second term as Istanbul's mayor last year, when his CHP
party swept local elections there and in Ankara.

It was the first time since Erdogan came to power that his party was
defeated across the country at the ballot box.

The elections were also a personal blow to the president, who grew up
in and became mayor of Istanbul on his rise to power.

Erdogan has held office for the past 22 years, as both prime minister
and president of Turkey. Due to term limits, he cannot run for office
again in 2028 unless he changes the constitution.

The CHP's presidential candidate selection, in which 1.5 million
members will vote and Imamoglu is the only person running, is set to
take place on Sunday.

The party has also called on citizens to vote in a symbolic election,
with plans to place ballot boxes in districts all over Turkey for
people to show their support for the detained mayor.
