WHY TRUMP IS STRUGGLING TO WIN FAST CEASEFIRE IN UKRAINE

WHY TRUMP IS STRUGGLING TO SECURE FAST CEASEFIRE IN UKRAINE

When Donald Trump met President Zelensky in New York last September,
the then US presidential candidate exuded confidence he could bring
the war in Ukraine to an early end. "If we win, I think we're going to
get it resolved very quickly," he said.

How quickly he meant varied over time. In a TV debate a few days
earlier, Trump had promised he would "get it settled before I even
become president". This was an escalation on his previous commitment
in May 2023 to stop the fighting in the first 24 hours of his
presidency.

Trump has now been in office for more than two months and the penny
may be beginning to drop in the White House that trying to end a
conflict as bitter and complex as this may take time.

In a television interview last weekend, the US president admitted that
when he promised to end the war in a day, he was "being a little bit
sarcastic".

There are many reasons for the slower progress than Team Trump may
have anticipated.

First, the president's belief in the power of his personal, one-on-one
diplomacy may have been misplaced. He has long believed any
international problem can be solved if he sits down with another
leader and agrees a deal. Trump first spoke to Vladimir Putin on 12
February, an hour-and-a-half conversation he described as "highly
productive". The two leaders spoke again on 18 March.

But it is clear these telephone calls failed to secure the immediate
30-day interim ceasefire Trump wanted. The only substantive concession
he squeezed out of Putin was a promise to end Russian attacks on
Ukrainian energy facilities, a commitment he is accused by Ukraine of
breaking within hours of the call.

Second, the Russian president has made it clear he does not intend to
be rushed. His first public comments about the negotiations came last
week in a press conference that was a whole month after his telephone
call with Trump.

Putin showed he was resolutely opposed to the US two-stage strategy of
seeking an interim ceasefire before talking about a longer-term
settlement. Instead, he said any talks must address what he sees as
"the root causes of the war", namely his fears an expanding Nato
alliance and the very existence of Ukraine as a sovereign state
somehow present a threat to Russia's security. He also set out
detailed questions and conditions that must be answered and met before
any deal could be agreed.

Third, the US strategy of directing its initial focus on Ukraine may
have been misjudged. The White House came to the belief that President
Zelensky was the obstacle to peace. Western diplomats acknowledge the
Ukrainian government was slow to realise just how much the world had
changed with the arrival of Trump.

But the US pressure on Kyiv that led to the now infamous confrontation
in the Oval Office - when Trump and his vice-president, JD Vance,
harangued the Ukrainian leader - consumed time, effort and political
capital.

It also ruptured transatlantic relations, setting Europe and the US at
odds, another diplomatic problem that took time to settle. All the
while Vladimir Putin sat back and enjoyed the show, biding his time.

Fourth, the sheer complexity of the conflict makes any resolution
hard. The Ukrainian offer was initially for an interim ceasefire in
the air and at sea. The idea was that this would be relatively
straightforward to monitor.

But in last week's talks in Jeddah, the US insisted any immediate
ceasefire should also include the more than 1200km-long front line in
the east. Instantly that made the logistics of verifying any ceasefire
more complicated. This, of course, was then rejected by Putin.

But even his agreement to the more modest proposal - to end attacks on
energy infrastructure - is not without its problems. It is the details
about that proposal which will occupy much of the technical
negotiations that are expected to take place in Saudi Arabia on
Monday. Military and energy experts will draw up detailed lists of
potential power plants – nuclear or otherwise – that might be
protected.

They will also try to agree which weapons systems should not be used.
But agreeing the difference between energy and other civilian
infrastructure may take some time. Remember: Ukraine and Russia are
not talking to one another; they are engaging separately and
bilaterally with the US which is promising to shuttle between both
sides. This again adds to the time.

Fifth, the US focus on the economic benefits of a ceasefire distracted
attention from the priority of ending the fighting. Trump has spent
time trying to agree a framework deal giving US firms access to
Ukrainian critical minerals. Some saw this as the US investing in
Ukraine's future - others as it extorting the country's natural
resources.

President Zelensky argued initially he could agree a deal only if the
US promised to provide Ukraine with security guarantees to deter
future Russian aggression. The White House refused, saying the
presence of US mining firms and workers would be deterrent enough.
Eventually Zelensky conceded defeat and said he would agree a minerals
deal without security guarantees. But despite that, the US has yet to
sign the agreement, hoping again to improve the terms, possibly by
including access to or even ownership of Ukrainian nuclear power
plants.

Ending wars can be complex and time consuming. We would not have got
to this stage without Trump's pushing, but progress has not been as
quick or simple as he believed. In December 2018, as he campaigned for
the presidency, Volodymyr Zelensky suggested negotiations with
Vladimir Putin would be quite straightforward. "You need to talk in a
very simple way," he told the Ukrainian journalist, Dmytro Gordon.
'"What do you want, what are your conditions?" And I'd tell them:
'Here are our points.' We would agree somewhere in the middle."

Well, on the evidence of the last two months, it may be harder than
that.
