EUROPE STOCKS LOWER; UK BORROWING COSTS FALL AFTER SPRING FISCAL
STATEMENT AND GILT ISSUANCE ANNOUNCEMENT

U.K. borrowing costs fell on Wednesday as markets broadly welcomed a
flurry of economic news and fiscal announcements.

The yield on 2-year U.K. government bonds, known as gilts, was 3 basis
points lower at 2:20 p.m. The 10-year gilt yield was just over 2 basis
points lower.

Wednesday kicked off with a U.K. inflation print which showed price
rises unexpectedly cooled to 2.8% in February, fueling hopes for a
more decisive path of rate cuts from the Bank of England this year.

In the early afternoon, U.K. Finance Minister Rachel Reeves delivered
her spring budget update, confirmed expectations for billions of
pounds worth of spending cuts, targeting welfare and overseas aid,
along with measures to crackdown on tax evasion. The government
meanwhile reiterated its commitment to increase defense spending to
2.5% of GDP and reform planning rules to boost growth, while sticking
to its "fiscal rules."

READ CNBC'S COVERAGE HERE

Following Reeves' speech, the U.K.'s Debt Management Office announced
it planned to issue £299.2 billion ($385.5 billion) in gilts for the
2025-2026 year, slightly higher than during the previous year, but
just below the £304 billion estimated in a survey of financial
institutions by Reuters.

"The market reaction shows the government managed to beforehand
properly calibrate expectations... they're making a point to financial
markets that they won't blithely spend and hope investors will finance
it," George Lagarias, chief economist at Forvis Mazars, told CNBC.

The size of the bond package is closely watched as an indicator of the
level of supply in the market for the coming year. It is still among
the biggest issuances on record, but here too Lagarias said the
reaction would be favorable, given expectations.

"Gilt yields have been rising over the last weeks, but [the
government] paid the price beforehand to avoid being rattled by
unexpected volatility. The former you can deal with, the latter can
bring down your government," Lagarias said.

The U.K.'s FTSE 100 was 0.1% higher and the FTSE 250 gained 0.4%,
bucking the regional trend which saw Germany's DAX and France's CAC 40
down by 0.86% and 0.69%, respectively.

The pan-European Stoxx 600 stock market index was 0.7% lower.

Asia-Pacific markets traded higher, tracking Wall Street gains on
Tuesday on expectations that U.S. President Donald Trump's tariffs
could be softer than expected earlier. 

U.S. markets closed slightly higher Tuesday despite the release of
consumer confidence data showing that U.S. consumers' near-term
outlook on income, business and job prospects dropped to the lowest
reading in 12 years.
