WHY ST PATRICK'S WEEK IN WASHINGTON IS A LONG TIME IN POLITICS

WHY ST PATRICK'S WEEK IS A LONG TIME IN POLITICS

St Patrick's week in Washington DC is not for the faint-hearted.

As she addressed the crowd at the Northern Ireland Bureau breakfast on
Thursday, Deputy First Minister Emma Little-Pengelly urged everyone to
remember - "It's a marathon, not a sprint".

She was at her umpteenth St Patrick's-related event in the US capital
and she was reminding guests of the need to pace themselves - as if
anyone needed to be reminded.

Businesses breakfasts, working lunches, White House visits and evening
receptions are the staple diet of those travelling to DC as part of
the annual Irish influx.

For just one week everyone is Irish and those who form part of the
travelling circus have their stamina rewarded with enviable access to
the movers and shakers within the US political elite.

That's why politicians, business and civic leaders, academics and
investors all clamber to get into the room.

In Washington "grip and grin" is still how they do business.

TOE-TO-TOE WITH TRUMP

This year the deputy first minister was without her partner in
government, First Minister Michelle O'Neill.

Twelve months earlier the pair were lauded wherever they went.

Little-Pengelly had to make do with taking the applause on her own
this time, joking at one point that she and O'Neill were not unlike
the Gallagher brothers in Oasis - no-one can ever be sure if they'll
both turn up at the same time.

While Little-Pengelly had a relatively straightforward week, the same
cannot be said for Taoiseach (Irish Prime Minister) Micheál Martin.

There was a huge media focus on his planned face-to-face meeting with
US President Donald Trump in the Oval Office.

Everybody remembers what happened to Ukrainian President Volodymyr
Zelensky.

Popular opinion suggests Martin went toe-to-toe with the president and
avoided any knockout blows. His late father, a celebrated Irish boxer,
would have been proud.

Some of Trump's comments, however, did prove controversial.

After the president expressed his admiration for the Irish former
mixed martial arts boxer Conor McGregor, Little-Pengelly told BBC News
NI's The View that she engages "with the office of president", rather
than his "particular personal views".

The St Patrick's celebrations normally assure Irish affairs of
top-billing in Washington but this year the president's focus is on a
bigger prize.

As he attempts to move the pieces around on the international chess
board, Donald Trump has little time for other countries' ambitions. It
is US first, second and third.

So with two high profile conflicts to resolve, trade tariffs to impose
and a cost of living challenge for US citizens, that leaves Ireland -
north and south - further down the agenda, as the BBC's chief
presenter in the US, Caitríona Perry, told the Red Lines podcast.

That's not to say there isn't still a huge amount of goodwill towards
everyone from the "old country".

The Irish ambassador's reception was one of the hottest tickets in
town.

Green milkshakes and perfectly poured pints of Guinness were downed in
equal measure.

TARIFFS? IT'S WHISKEY BUSINESS

The biggest crowd of the week is always at the Ireland Funds gala
dinner.

The taoiseach was temporarily upstaged by members of the Burke family,
protesting at the treatment of the County Mayo schoolteacher Enoch
Burke.

Also making headlines in the margins of the dinner was the former
Democratic Unionist Party MP for North Antrim, Ian Paisley.

In his first interview since he lost his Westminster seat last summer,
he told Sunday Politics that he is a close friend of Trump but will
still fly the flag for Bushmills whiskey in the face of potentially
crippling tariffs.

And the word of the week? Semiquincentennial.

That's the big party planned for next year when the US turns 250, and
it promises to be quite an event.

And with so many significant figures in the history of the nation
tracing their roots back to the island of Ireland, many familiar faces
will be vying to be on the guest list.

That's provided they have recovered from the St Patrick's marathon
this time next year.

_You can watch the special coverage of events in Washington DC on
Sunday Politics at 10:00 GMT on _BBC One NI _& BBC iPlayer._
