INDIA ACCUSED OF MEDDLING IN CANADA'S CONSERVATIVE PARTY LEADERSHIP
RACE

INDIA ACCUSED OF MEDDLING IN CANADA'S CONSERVATIVE PARTY RACE

Canada's Conservative leader Pierre Poilievre has said he won his
leadership "fair and square" after reports emerged that India
allegedly meddled in the party's contest.

Citing a source with top-security clearance, the Globe and Mail
newspaper reported allegations that Indian agents were involved in
fundraising and organising within Canada's South Asian community for
Poilievre in the 2022 leadership race.

There is no evidence that Poilievre or his team were aware of the
alleged interference.

The allegation dominated the second full day of campaigning in
Canada's general election, which will be held on 28 April.

India has been accused of interfering in Canada's elections in the
past. Its government has repeatedly denied those allegations.

On Monday night, the Globe and Mail reported that Canadian
intelligence agents were unable to raise the issue of India's alleged
interference with Poilievre because he has not obtained the necessary
security clearance.

The report said India's alleged attempts to interfere were part of a
larger effort to influence Canadian politicians of all parties.

Poilievre is the only Canadian federal party leader running for prime
minister that has refused the security clearance.

He defended his decision on Tuesday, calling the process politicised
and saying it would bar him from being able to speak publicly about
issues of national importance.

"What I will not do is commit to the oath of secrecy that the Liberals
want to impose on me," Poilievre told reporters.

"They don't want me to speak about these matters, so they bring me
into a dark room and they say: 'We're going to give you a little bit
of bread crumbs of intel and then we'll tell you you can't talk about
this stuff any more.'"

Poilievre won the 2022 leadership race with 68% of the vote. Canadian
intelligence agents said there is no indication the alleged
interference attempt influenced the outcome, the Globe and Mail
reported.

The Globe's reporting was also confirmed by broadcaster Radio-Canada.

The allegations served as political ammunition for Liberal leader Mark
Carney, who criticised Poilievre for not obtaining the clearance,
telling reporters on Tuesday that it was "beyond baffling".

"I find it downright irresponsible that the Leader of the Opposition
day-after-day, month-after-month, year-after-year refuses to obtain a
security clearance," Carney said.

Foreign meddling in Canada's elections has been a growing concern in
recent years, and a public inquiry was launched last year to look into
the issue.

The foreign interference inquiry concluded that China and India had
attempted to interfere in Canada's two previous elections.

While these attempts were "troubling" they had "minimal impact", a
final report by the inquiry said - but it warned that disinformation
posed an "existential threat" to the country's democracy.

A Canadian election integrity task force cautioned on Monday that
agents tied to China, Russia and India will try to influence the
ongoing campaign.

The Security and Intelligence Threats to Elections (SITE) task force
said foreign agents could use tools like artificial intelligence,
proxies and online disinformation to target diaspora communities in
Canada to try and influence how they vote.

Officials said Canadians will likely see a "more active" federal
government response on issues of disinformation as a result.
