GERMANY: HUNDREDS OF FLIGHTS CANCELLED AS STRIKES HIT AIRPORTS

HUNDREDS OF FLIGHTS CANCELLED AS STRIKES HIT GERMAN AIRPORTS

Hundreds of flights have been cancelled across Germany as airport
workers stage a nationwide strike over pay, posing a major disruption
for air travellers.

The industrial action, led by the trade union Verdi, began
unexpectedly on Sunday at Hamburg Airport, before expanding to a
nationwide strike.

Passengers at Frankfurt, Munich, Berlin and other major hubs have been
urged not to travel to airports, with operations severely disrupted.
Frankfurt, Germany's busiest airport, said passengers would be unable
to board flights and transfer would "almost certainly" be affected.

Verdi, which represents public sector and transport workers, is in an
ongoing dispute over wages and working conditions.

German media reports thousands of flights could be cancelled across
the day, disrupting travel for more than 500,000 passengers.

The Lufthansa group, whose main hub is in Frankfurt, confirmed "delays
and extensive cancellations" across all its airlines.

Meanwhile, Munich Airport warned of a "greatly reduced flight
schedule". This includes flights by Eurowings, Austrian Airlines and
Swiss Air.

Katja Bromm, spokeswoman for Hamburg Airport, where all 143 departures
scheduled on Monday have already been cancelled, said Verdi was
"dishonourable" to call a strike without notice at the start of the
holiday season.

She said that Sunday's walkouts were "excessive and unfair to tens of
thousands of travellers who have nothing to do with the disputes".

A spokesman for Verdi accepted that the strike would affect many, but
said the travel disruption was necessary to extracting a better pay
offer.

Lars Stubbe, the union's Hamburg representative, told the BBC: "The
workers are aware that disruptions do happen, and they are
uncomfortable with that, but in any case, it is the employer that
caused these strikes because they haven't put a negotiable offer on
the table."

Many of Frankfurt Airport's 1,770 scheduled flights have already been
cancelled, while the majority of Munich's 820 flights are expected to
be cancelled.

Hundreds more cancellations are anticipated across Stuttgart,
Dusseldorf, Cologne and Berlin. 

Many passengers had already checked in their luggage and were having
problems getting it returned, according to public broadcaster NDR.

ADV, which represents major German airports, said the strike had
"almost completely paralysed air traffic".

Verdi's demands include an 8% pay rise, or at least €350 (£294)
more per month, for all workers - and three extra days of holiday,
plus one additional day for union members.

Stubbe said that while airport wages range were above minimum wage,
ranging from €13-€25 per hour, workers in different roles -
particularly security staff - received less annual leave than others.

"There have been two rounds of negotiations in which the employers
have not yet offered one penny," he added.

"It is quite usual that we don't get any offers in the first round,
but now even in the second round, the employers have basically said,
'No, we're not going to give you an offer because we don't have any
money'."

BDLS, the body which sets security workers' pay, said in a statement:
"The damage caused by this strike is almost exclusively to companies
that are not at the negotiating table."

It called on the government to outlaw short-notice strikes, adding
that air transport was "essential for Germany as a business location"
which "must not be exploited" in collective pay disputes.

Ralph Beisel, ADV's general manager, said the strike was having an
impact on European and global air traffic, leading to missed
connections due to a "domino effect".

He called for reforms to German strike laws concerning "critical"
infrastructure.

The so-called "warning strike", an established tactic in German wage
negotiations, concerns two separate pay disputes: one relating to
airport security workers, and a broader disagreement over pay for
federal and municipal government employees.

Verdi has also called for strikes in waste collection across several
German cities, including Berlin, Essen and Kiel, where bins have gone
unemptied since last week.

Pay talks for government workers are set to restart on Friday in
Potsdam, while the next round of talks for airport security staff is
scheduled to begin on 26 March.

Niklas Benrath, of the VKA, which regulates pay and conditions for
municipal workers, also criticised the strikes, saying Verdi's demands
would cost nearly €15bn.

"With a total municipal debt of around €160bn, these demands are not
financially viable," he added.
