FIVE KEY TAKEAWAYS FROM THE GERMAN ELECTION

Friedrich Merz's conservatives have won, but Germany's 2025 election
has thrown up some important and fascinating stories that reveal a
country in flux.

Alternative for Germany, or AfD, has doubled its support in just four
years to 20.8%, and has spread out from its support base in the east
to become the second biggest political force in parliament.

Meanwhile, outgoing Chancellor Olaf Scholz's SPD had its worst
performance in decades, only securing 16.4% of the vote.

Here are five key takeaways.

AFD DOMINANT IN EAST, SPREADING TO THE WEST

Look at an election results map of Germany, and you could almost have
travelled back in time to the Cold War, when an iron curtain divided
communist East Germany from the west.

In the east it's a swathe of AfD light blue, apart from pockets like
Berlin and half of Leipzig. In the west the vast majority has turned
conservative black, especially in Bavaria where Merz's conservative
sister party, the CSU, dominates the landscape.

But the AfD is spreading in the west too, and political loyalty to the
old mainstream parties has gone.

For one in five Germans it has become normalised. "They're just normal
people," said one young man of immigrant origin in Duisburg, a city in
western Germany's old industrial heartland.

Even though it came second, the AfD is blocked from being part of the
next government because of a "firewall" - or_ Brandmauer _- operated
by Germany's main parties, who do not co-operate with any party seen
as extremist since the end of World War Two.

The AfD's leader Alice Weidel insists it is a libertarian,
conservative movement, not racist. Its big increase in public support
has coincided with a series of deadly attacks in the past nine months,
all allegedly by immigrants.

The AfD has embraced a highly controversial policy called
"remigration", which it defines as deporting migrants who have
committed crimes. But the term can also refer to the mass deportation
of migrants and their descendants.

In May 2024 a German court rejected an AfD appeal against a ruling
classifying it as a suspected far-right extremist organisation. Judges
found that the AfD had "positions that disparage the democratic order
and are incompatible with the principle of democracy".

In three German states in the east - Thuringia, Saxony-Anhalt and
Saxony - domestic intelligence has designated the AfD as right-wing
extremist.

A leading AfD figure in Thuringia, Björn Höcke, has twice been
convicted of using a banned Nazi slogan "Alles für Deutschland" -
everything for Germany. Alice Weidel supporters have chanted her name
during the election campaign, using the phrase "Alice für
Deutschland".

GERMANS VOTED IN BIGGEST TURNOUT FOR 40 YEARS

Not since 1987 has turnout been as high as 82.5% in a German election,
and that was three years before reunification of east and west.

Four years ago it was 76.6%.

Put simply, more than four in every five of Germany's 59.2 million
voters turned out.

It reflects just how energised Germans have been by this election,
which comes at a pivotal moment for their country. There were nine TV
debates in the final stretch of the campaign, but that reflected the
broad interest of the audience.

ALL OVER FOR LEADERS OF COLLAPSED GOVERNMENT

The three-party government of outgoing Chancellor Olaf Scholz fell
apart at the end of last year, and within 24 hours of Sunday's
election, all three leaders have said they're leaving the front line
of politics.

The leader of the economic liberals, the FDP, was first. Christian
Lindner has led his party for 11 years. But it failed to get any MPs
elected and Lindner has said he's leaving politics after 25 years.

It was Lindner's refusal to compromise on debt rules that first
brought the government down, and then sent his party into the
wilderness.

Although Scholz will remain as chancellor until the next government is
formed, he won't be taking part in coalition talks and will be leaving
frontline politics.

Greens Vice-Chancellor Robert Habeck is also leaving frontline
politics after his party fell below 12% in the election.

TIKTOK GENERATION HAULS LEFT BACK FROM DEAD

Until a few weeks ago, the Left party looked doomed when one of its
leading lights, Sahra Wagenknecht, went off and founded her own, more
populist, party with eight other MPs.

Wagenknecht's popularity soared for a while as head of her BSW party,
but ultimately fell just below the 5% threshold for getting into
parliament.

The story was very different for the Left (_Die Linke_), which came
back from the dead with an inspired social medial campaign.

Heidi Reichinnek, Die Linke's co-chair, went viral after she gave a
speech enthusiastically defending the firewall against the AfD.

She now has 580,000 followers on TikTok and her post has attracted
seven million views.

Her party secured just under 9% of the vote.

YOUNG GO LEFT AND RIGHT, OLD STICK TO CENTRE

Die Linke's viral videos helped secure a quarter of the 18-24 vote,
and the AfD were not far behind with 21%, according to surveys by ARD
TV.

Alice Weidel was the biggest hit on social media during the election,
even bigger than Heidi Reichinnek. She has attracted more than 935,000
followers on TikTok.

For the over-35s, it was the Christian Democrats who won out, and more
men than women.
