TRUMP TARIFFS: WILL IMPORT DUTY WAR PUSH INDIA TO OPEN ITS MARKETS?

WILL TRUMP'S TARIFF WAR SPARK BIG-BANG REFORMS IN INDIA?

India has usually turned to economic reforms in times of distress,
with the most famous example being 1991, when the country embraced
liberalisation in the face of a deep financial crisis.

Now, with US President Donald Trump's tit-for-tat tariff wars and the
global trade upheaval that has followed, many believe that India finds
itself at another crossroad.

Could this be a major opportunity for the world's fifth largest
economy to shed its protectionism and further open up its economy?
Will India seize the moment, just as it did more than three decades
ago, or will it retreat further?

Trump has repeatedly branded India a "tariff king" and a "big abuser"
of trade ties. The problem is that India's trade-weighted import
duties - the average duty rate per imported product - are among the
highest in the world. The US average tariff is 2.2%, China's is 3% and
Japan's is 1.7%. India's stands at a whopping 12%, according to data
from the World Trade Organization.

High tariffs increase costs for companies dependent on global value
chains, hindering their ability to compete in international markets.
They also mean that Indians pay more on imported goods than foreign
consumers. Despite growing exports - primarily driven by services -
India runs a significant trade deficit. However, with India's share of
global exports at a mere 1.5%, the challenge becomes even more urgent.

The jury is out on whether Trump's tariff war will help India break
free or double down on protectionism. Narendra Modi's government,
often criticised for its protectionist stance, already seems to have
shifted gears.

Last month, ahead of Prime Minister Modi's meeting with Trump in
Washington, India unilaterally lowered tariffs on Bourbon whiskey,
motorcycles and some other US products.

Commerce Minister Piyush Goyal has made two trips to the US to discuss
a potential trade deal, following Trump's threatened retaliatory
tariffs, looming on 2 April. (Citi Research analysts estimate India
could lose up to $7bn annually from reciprocal tariffs, primarily
affecting sectors like metals, chemicals and jewellery, with
pharmaceuticals, automobiles and food products also at risk.)

Last week, Goyal urged Indian exporters to "come out of their
protectionist mindset and encouraged them to be bold and ready to deal
with the world from a position of strength and self-confidence",
according to a statement from his ministry.

India is also actively pursuing free trade deals with several
countries, including the UK and New Zealand, and the European Union.

In an interesting turn of events, homegrown telecoms giants Reliance
Jio and Bharti Airtel have teamed up with Trump ally Elon Musk's
SpaceX to launch satellite internet services via Starlink in India.
The move surprised analysts, especially after Musk's recent clashes
with both companies, and came as US and Indian officials negotiate the
trade deal.

India's rapid growth from the late 1990s to the 2000s - 8.1% between
2004-2009 and 7.46% from 2009-2014 - was in large part driven by its
gradual integration into global markets, particularly in
pharmaceuticals, software, autos, textiles and garments, alongside a
steady reduction in tariffs. Since then, India has turned inwards.

Many economists believe that protectionist policies over the past
decade have undermined Modi's Make in India initiative, which
prioritised capital- and technology-intensive sectors over
labour-intensive ones like textiles. As a result, it has struggled to
boost manufacturing and exports.

High tariffs have also fostered protectionism in several Indian
industries, discouraging investments in efficiency, according to Viral
Acharya, a professor of economics at New York University Stern School
of Business.

This has allowed "cosy incumbents" to gain market power by
consolidating their positions without facing much competition. As Mr
Acharya, a former central banker, noted in a paper by Brookings
Institution, restoring industrial balance in India requires "reducing
tariffs to increase the country's share of global goods trade and
reduce protectionism".

With India's tariffs already higher than those of most countries,
further increases could be especially damaging.

"We need to boost exports and a tit-for-tat tariff war won't help us.
China can afford this strategy due to its massive export base, but we
can't, as we hold only a small share of the global market," Rajeswari
Sengupta, an associate professor of economics at Mumbai-based Indira
Gandhi Institute of Development Research, said. "A trade conflict
could hurt us more than others."

In light of this, India finds itself at a crossroad. As the world
undergoes a major shift, India has a "unique opportunity to shape a
new vision" for global trade, says Aseema Sinha, a trade expert at
Claremont McKenna College.

By lowering protectionist barriers in South Asia and strengthening
ties with Southeast Asia and the Middle East, India has the chance to
lead in shaping a new trade vision, positioning itself as a key player
in a "re-globalised" world, Ms Sinha, author of Globalising India,
says.

"By reducing tariffs, India could become the regional and
cross-regional magnet for trade and economic activity, drawing in
varied powers in its orbit," she adds.

That could help India create the jobs it desperately needs at home.
Agriculture, which makes up 15% of its GDP, accounts for a whopping
40% of employment, reflecting extremely low productivity. Construction
remains the second-largest employer, absorbing casual daily workers.

India's challenge isn't in expanding its thriving service sector,
which already makes up nearly half of total exports, but in dealing
with the large pool of unskilled workers who lack the basic skills
needed for service jobs.

"While high-end services are thriving, the majority of the workforce
remains uneducated and underemployed, often relegated to construction
or informal jobs. To provide meaningful employment to millions
entering the workforce each year, India must ramp up its manufacturing
exports, as relying solely on services won't address the needs of the
unskilled labour force," says Ms Sengupta.

One concern is that reducing tariffs could lead to dumping, where
foreign companies flood the market with cheap goods, potentially
harming domestic industries.

According to Ms Sengupta, India's ideal approach to trade would
involve a "universal reduction" in import tariffs, as it currently has
some of the highest tariffs among its trading partners.

However, there is a caveat: China's trade struggles, particularly with
the US due to the ongoing trade war, could lead to Chinese dumping in
India in the "short run".

"To protect against this, India can use non-tariff barriers against
China but only against this one country and only in cases of proven
dumping. Barring that, it is in India's interest to do a wholesale
slashing of tariffs," she says.

There's also a growing concern that India may be overcompensating in
its efforts to flatter the US.

Ajay Srivastava, founder of the Global Trade Research Initiative
(GTRI), believes that India's tendency to soften trade policies "based
on rhetoric rather than economic pressure" shows a lack of
assertiveness in global trade talks.

If this trend continues, he says, India may end up making even more
compromises in its trade deal with the US, further "eroding its
bargaining power".

"In comparison to other major economies, India's pre-emptive surrender
on multiple trade fronts - without the US imposing a single
country-specific tariff - makes it appear exceptionally vulnerable to
pressure tactics."

The broader consensus seems to be that India should capitalise on what
could be the unintended consequences of Trump's tariff wars. Pranjul
Bhandari, chief India economist at HSBC, believes that "potential US
tariffs may have become a catalyst for reforms.".

"If supply chains are rejigged again during the second Trump
presidency due to higher tariffs on large exporters, and the world
looks for new producers, India may get a second chance," she writes.

Creating jobs that manufacture goods for the world won't be easy.
India has largely missed the bus on low-end, unskilled factory work -
jobs China dominated for decades. Automation is taking over. Without
deeper reforms, India risks being left behind.
