SOUTH KOREA ACCUSED OF  'MASS EXPORTING' CHILDREN IN OVERSEAS
ADOPTIONS

SOUTH KOREA ADMITS TO 'MASS EXPORTING' CHILDREN FOR ADOPTION

South Korean governments committed numerous human rights violations
over decades in a controversial programme that sent at least 170,000
children and babies abroad for adoption, a landmark inquiry has found.

It said the government's lack of oversight enabled the "mass
exportation of children" by private agencies that were driven by
profit, and found examples of fraud, falsified records and coercion.

Since the 1950s, South Korea has sent more children abroad for
adoption than any other country, with most sent to Western countries.

South Korea has sinced moved to tighten its adoption processes, but
some adoptees and their biological parents say they are still haunted
by what they went through. The BBC spoke to one woman who claimed her
adoptive parents "took better care of the dog than they ever did of
me".

"This is a shameful part of our history," said Park Sun-young, the
chairperson of the commission, at a press briefing.

"While many adoptees were fortunate to grow up in loving families,
others suffered great hardship and trauma due to flawed adoption
processes. Even today, many continue to face challenges."

The report was released on Wednesday by the independent Truth and
Reconciliation Commission following an investigation that began in
2022.

Since then, 367 adoptees - all of which were sent overseas between
1964 and 1999 - had filed petitions alleging fradulent practices in
their adoption process.

Some 100 petitions have been analysed so far, of whom 56 adoptees were
recognised as victims of human rights violations. The commission is
still investigating other cases, with the inquiry set to end in May.

In the aftermath of the Korean war, South Korea was one of the poorest
countries in the world and few families were keen on adopting
children.

South Korea's government then began a transnational adoption programme
handled by private agencies, which were given significant powers
through special adoption laws.

But there was a "systemic failure in oversight and management", which
led to numerous lapses committed by these agencies, according to the
report.

The report noted that foreign agencies had demanded a set number of
children every month and Korean agencies complied, "facilitating
large-scale intercountry adoptions with minimal procedural oversight".

With no government regulation on fees, the Korean agencies charged
large amounts and demanded "donations", which turned adoptions into "a
profit-driven industry", according to the report.

Other lapses include adoptions conducted without proper consent from
birth mothers and inadequate screening of adoptive parents.

The agencies also fabricated reports that made children appear as if
they were abandoned and put up for adoption; and intentionally gave
children wrong identities.

Because many adoptees had false identities listed in their paperwork,
they now struggle to obtain information about their birth families and
are left with inadequate legal protection, the report noted.

The commission has recommended the government deliver an official
apology, and to comply with international standards on transnational
adoptions.

'I HAVE HAD A PAINFUL AND MISERABLE LIFE'

South Korea has moved to tighten its adoption processes in recent
years. In 2023, it passed a law ensuring that all overseas adoptions
would be handled by a government ministry instead of private agencies,
which is due to come into effect by July.

The South Korean government has yet to respond to Wednesday's report.

Inger-Tone Ueland Shin, 60, was one of the petitioners whose cases
were investigated by the commission. She was adopted by a Norwegian
couple when she was 13 - and discovered later on that her adoption was
illegal.

The couple, who were in their 50s at the time, had initially applied
to adopt but were rejected by Norwegian authorities as they were too
old.

They then travelled to South Korea and visited an orphanage, where
they selected Inger-Tone and took her with them to Norway.

The couple only submitted an adoption application to Norwegian
authorities years later. The authorities approved it, despite
acknowledging the illegality of Inger-Tone's situation, because they
determined that by then she had "no connection to Korea anymore".

Inger-Tone told the BBC she had great difficulty adjusting to life in
Norway, and also alleged her adoptive father sexually abused her.

"They took better care of the dog than they ever did of me," she said.
"It was so painful. I wasn't able to talk or express myself, other
than crying at night".

In 2022, she successfully sued her local government in Norway and was
awarded damages. She also received her local government's
acknowledgment that it was liable for "failing to supervise" her
adoptive home.

Her adoptive parents have since died.

"They have never spent time in prison for what they've done to me.
They criminally picked up a child outside of the country... nobody has
taken responsibility for what they did to me," she said.

While she is satisfied with the results of the commission's
investigation, she said: "I have been living in the wrong country and
I have had a painful and miserable life."

"I don't wish this for anyone and I sincerely hope they do not adopt
any more children out of Korea."
