COLUMBIA STUDENT PROTESTER SUES TRUMP ADMINISTRATION TO STOP
DEPORTATION

COLUMBIA STUDENT PROTESTER SUES TRUMP TO STOP DEPORTATION

A Columbia University student who moved to the US as a child is suing
the Trump administration over attempts to deport her for participating
in pro-Palestinian protests.

Yunseo Chung, 21, a legal permanent US resident who moved from South
Korea when she was seven, alleges immigration officials have executed
search warrants at multiple Columbia facilities, including her
dormitory.

The lawsuit seeks to block her detention and deportation, citing First
Amendment and other constitutional rights.

It follows the administration's recent detention of Mahmoud Khalil, a
prominent pro-Palestinian activist, who helped negotiate between
university officials and student protesters.

Ms Chung's lawyers have said she participated in campus protests
against Israel's war in Gaza, but had not made statements to the press
or taken on a high-profile role like Mr Khalil.

The Department of Homeland Security claims Ms Chung engaged in
"concerning conduct", including her arrest at nearby Barnard College
demonstration over student expulsions linked to pro-Palestinian
protests, US media report.

The BBC has contacted the agency for comment.

The lawsuit alleges that Trump administration officials began efforts
to arrest and detain Ms Chung, days after that 5 March, 2025 sit-in
protest she attended.

On 8 March, the lawsuit states, Immigrations and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) officials signed an arrest warrant for the third-year student,
and soon after agents went to her parents' home searching for her.

The suit challenges what it describes as the Trump administration's
"pattern and practice of targeting individuals associated with
protests for Palestinian rights for immigration enforcement in
retaliation for their core protected political speech", her lawyers
said.

Ms Chung is one of several university students Trump officials have
attempted to detain and deport over their involvement in
pro-Palestinian protests.

The lawsuit also names other students facing deportation, including
Cornell doctoral student Momodou Taal and Columbia international
student Ranjani Srinivasan, whose visa was revoked.

The arrest of Mr Khalil by immigration agents was linked to President
Donald Trump's promise to crack down on student demonstrators he
accuses of "un-American activity".

He has not been charged with any crime and his detention sparked
nationwide protests.

Mr Khalil's wife, who is a US citizen, is eight months pregnant.

The 30-year-old's lawyers say he was exercising free speech rights to
demonstrate in support of Palestinians in Gaza and against US support
for Israel. They accused the government of "open repression of student
activism and political speech".

Trump officials have cited the Immigration and Nationality Act, which
allows the State Department to deport non-citizens who are
"adversarial to the foreign policy and national security interests" of
the US.

Secretary of State Marco Rubio has asserted that under this statute,
the US could deport visa and green-card holders for "virtually any
reason".

The administration has also revoked $400m in Columbia funding over
allegations the university failed to combat antisemitism on campus.

The university has agreed to several demands from Trump officials -
including requiring protesters to provide identification - for it to
consider reinstating the funding.
