GERMANY VOTES FOR HISTORIC BOOST TO DEFENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURE
SPENDING

GERMANY VOTES FOR HISTORIC BOOST TO DEFENCE SPENDING

German lawmakers have voted to allow a huge increase in defence and
infrastructure spending - a seismic shift for the country that could
reshape European defence.

A two-thirds majority of Bundestag parliamentarians, required for the
change, approved the vote on Tuesday.

The law will exempt spending on defence and security from Germany's
strict debt rules, and create a €500bn ($547bn; £420bn)
infrastructure fund.

This vote is a historic move for traditionally debt-shy Germany, and
could be hugely significant for Europe, as Russia's full-scale
invasion of Ukraine grinds on, and after US President Donald Trump
signalled an uncertain commitment to Nato and Europe's defence.

However, state government representatives in the upper house, the
Bundesrat, still need to approve the moves - also by a two-thirds
majority - before they officially become law. That vote is set for
Friday.

Friedrich Merz, the man behind these plans and who is expected to soon
be confirmed as Germany's new chancellor, told the lower house during
Tuesday's debate that the country had "felt a false sense of security"
for the past decade.

"The decision we are taking today... can be nothing less than the
first major step towards a new European defence community," he said,
adding that it includes countries that are "not members of the
European Union".

EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen called the vote
"excellent news".

Speaking at a press conference with Danish Prime Minister Mette
Frederiksen, she said the vote "sends a very clear message to Europe
that Germany is determined to invest massively in defence".

Frederiksen meanwhile called it "fantastic news for all Europeans".

Germany has long been cautious about defence spending, not just for
historical reasons dating back to 1945, but also due to the global
debt crisis of 2009.

But despite fears the vote would be tight, lawmakers in the end voted
in favour of the changes by 513 to 207 - comfortably over the
two-thirds majority required.

One leading German newspaper described this vote as "A day of destiny
for our nation".

Under the measure, any spending on defence that amounts to more than
1% of Germany's GDP would no longer be subject to a limit on
borrowing. Until now, this debt brake has been fixed at 0.35% of GDP.

The change could transform the country's partially neglected armed
forces in an era of great uncertainty for Europe.

And this vote was not just about defence. It was also about freeing up
€500bn for German infrastructure - fixing things like bridges and
roads, but also to pay for climate change measures, something the
Green Party insisted on.

Merz, whose CDU party won Germany's general election last month,
proposed the measures swiftly after the win.

In an interview on Sunday he specifically mentioned fears that the US
could pull back from defending Europe and Trump's talks with Russian
President Vladimir Putin, saying that the "situation has worsened in
recent weeks".

"That is why we have to act fast," Merz told public broadcaster ARD.

It is a significant political win for Merz, who will, when he takes
power as chancellor, now have access to hundreds of billions of euros
to invest in the state - what some in Germany have called a "fiscal
bazooka".

It is also an important moment for Ukraine. The defence plans approved
today by the Bundestag also allow spending on aid for states "attacked
in violation of international law" to be exempt from the debt brake.

That will enable outgoing Chancellor Olaf Scholz to release €3bn in
aid to Ukraine as early as next week.

Merz chose to push the changes through the old parliament, knowing the
vote arithmetic was more favourable now than it would be after 25
March, when the new parliament session begins.

The far-right AFD and far-left Linke, which both performed well in
February's election, oppose Merz's plans.

Merz has still not agreed a coalition deal to govern Germany after his
election win, and has announced ambitious plans to have a government
in place by Easter.

Coalition negotiations in Germany, however, can drag on for months at
a time.
