HAS GERMANY'S 'FIREWALL' AGAINST THE FAR RIGHT BEEN BREACHED BY AFD
SUCCESS?

GERMAN POLITICS FROZE OUT THE FAR RIGHT FOR YEARS – IS THIS ABOUT TO
CHANGE?

One in five German voters put an X in the box for Alternative for
Germany (AfD) on Sunday: a record result that has made them the second
biggest force in German politics.

Riding on the back of that success, the party is now calling for an
end to the consensus in German politics not to work with the far
right.

That "firewall" - _Brandmauer _in German - has worked since the end of
World War Two, but AfD joint leader Tino Chrupalla says: "Anyone who
erects firewalls will get grilled behind them."

There is a determination among all of Germany's main parties to keep
that block in place - and the German public backs them up: 69% see the
AfD as a threat to democracy, according to voters surveyed on Sunday.

Friedrich Merz, who won the election for the conservatives, believes
the only reason the AfD exists is because of problems such as
migration and security that need to be addressed: "We need to resolve
these problems... then that party, the AfD, will disappear."

The AfD won 20.8% of the vote nationally, and as the light blue areas
of the map show, it was dominant in the five states in the east,
securing 34%.

"East Germans have made it very clear they no longer want a firewall,"
said Tino Chrupalla.

Friedrich Merz will now go into talks on forming a government with the
Social Democrats, who came third.

Even though his party won 28.6% of the vote, it was still their
second-worst result since World War Two.

Support for the AfD doubled, and a million of their voters deserted
Merz's conservatives for them, according to a survey by research
institute Infratest dimap.

Voters have not been put off by the fact that Germany's domestic
intelligence classifies parts of the AfD as right-wing extremist - or
that the party has now embraced a policy called "remigration".

The AfD argues that remigration means deporting immigrants convicted
of crime, but the term has been used by the extreme right to mean mass
deportations.

One of the big issues for the Christian Democrats is how to get their
voters back and stop losing more.

Merz has already flirted with the AfD in parliament, relying on their
votes to push through a motion on migration.

But he was clearly stung by a public outcry and the mass protests that
followed in many German cities.

Germany's chancellor-in-waiting is unlikely to try that again,
especially if he forms a government with the centre-left.

But now the AfD has more than 150 seats in parliament, its supporters
in particular believe it is time for the firewall to go.

"I just hope that the firewall will fall. But we all know that it
won't be like that," says pro-AfD TikTok influencer Celina Brychcy,
26.

"I think it will fall at the latest when new elections are held. Then
they'll have to realise at some point they can't get through with what
they're doing right now."

"I think the _Brandmauer _will stay," says Dominic, 30, who voted for
the AfD in Saxony. "I want the government to really think about their
own people and their own country."

READ MORE ON THE GERMAN ELECTION HERE:

Merz signals seismic shift in transatlantic relations

Five key takeaways from German election

Conservatives celebrate, but AfD doubles vote

Pressure to take down the long-standing firewall is not just coming
from the AfD, but from leading figures in the Trump administration
too, including US Vice-President JD Vance and Elon Musk, who has
repeatedly backed the party.

Most of the voices you hear challenging the firewall come from the
east, which may not be surprising considering the deep reach of the
AfD, especially in the five eastern states out of a total of 16 across
Germany.

They won 38.6% of the vote in THURINGIA and 37.% in both SAXONY AND
SAXONY-ANHALT, far ahead of the CDU. It makes them increasingly
difficult to keep at arm's length.

On one of the big talkshows on German TV on Monday night, Harsh but
Fair, one local mayor from Saxony, Mirko Geissler, believed the AfD
should be put on the "playing field", so they could show what they
could do. If not, they would end up surging to 40-50% in the polls, he
warned.

Liane Bach, an independent mayor from a village in Thuringia said that
in her region, "AfD voters aren't right-wing extremists".

A CDU politician on the programme, Phillip Amthor, conceded there
should be "no firewalls between the democratic parties and people who
vote AfD".

That is the main issue the big national parties will have to address.
How to avoid ostracising AfD voters who clearly have no problem with
the firewall being breached.

One mayor pointed out that one of her fellow residents who was also an
AfD councillor was fixing the local fountain. It made no sense not to
work with him.

Prof Conrad Ziller from the University of Duisburg-Essen believes the
greatest threat to the firewall could come at state level, rather than
nationally.

"If you have trouble building a coalition in a state, then at some
point, there could be a minority government that relies on the AfD, or
gets votes from the AfD from time to time."

On a national level, the worst-case scenario would be for a breakdown
in a Merz-led coalition: "Merz could make mistakes. If he gets really
tough on immigration, it might become problematic with the SPD."

Germany has already seen one early election because of a coalition
collapse, and the AfD's Alice Weidel has made clear she is looking for
early elections.

Her repeated appearances on TV election debates have made her a
prominent figure in Germany and helped raise her party's profile.

But it was the constant focus on migration and security that became
the number one issue for AfD voters, partly fuelled by three deadly
attacks, all allegedly carried out by immigrants.

Tackling insecurity, and the perception of it, will be an immediate
task for the next government, when it eventually takes shape.

Underlying the urgency, Bavaria's centre-right leader Markus Söder
said the need to tackle immigration, along with Germany's faltering
economy, was "in fact, the last bullet of democracy".

There is no question of breaching the long-standing firewall for the
moment.

And the general secretary of Merz's party, Tom Unger, was adamant that
there should be no collaboration with a party that opposed Germany's
ties with the West, its membership of Nato and "the European idea".

That was incompatible, he said, with the conservatives' "core DNA".
