'WE ARE TIRED OF WAR': ISRAELIS AND GAZANS FEAR CEASEFIRE COLLAPSE

Israel has warned Hamas it will resume its military operations in Gaza
if the Palestinian armed group "does not return our hostages by
Saturday," sparking fresh anxiety for people on both sides of the
conflict.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's remarks came after Hamas
said it would not free more hostages until further notice, claiming
Israel had violated the terms of the three-week-old ceasefire deal.

With the fragile agreement to end the fighting under growing strain,
Israelis and Palestinians have shared their fears of its possible
collapse with BBC News.

On the streets of Khan Younis, Gaza's second largest city, 21-year-old
Imad Qudaih said "tension and fear" dominate.

"No one wants war to return again," he said from the southern city,
where conditions remain "extremely difficult".

Imad said there was anger about Trump's proposal for Gazans to leave
the strip, as well as fear of displacement - but he believed Trump's
plan was "not going to be achievable" and "is just words".

Displaced from eastern Gaza, Salman Mahmoud Abed said he "hoped to
God" the ceasefire would continue.

"We are people who have been displaced and are homeless," he told the
BBC.

"We lost our children, and our homes, and we are about to lose our
mental health as well.

"There is no normal life, no proper food or any psychological relief.

"We ask Hamas and Israel not to resume the war, because we are tired
of the war."

Ali Ismail Royshid - another Palestinian who has been displaced
several times, most recently from Jabalia refugee camp - told the BBC:
"Enough with the tragedy, enough of the farce."

"We want them to try to keep to the conditions, hold to the ceasefire
and stop the war."

Even with the pause in fighting, they were still far from an end to
the war, he said, adding: "The war is still there, we are still
homeless.

"How can we forget the war while we are still homeless living in
tents?"

Abu Ahmed, who was displaced from northern Gaza, said he was scared
neither of the war nor of Trump's statements.

"We are not scared of the war, because we have witnessed a lot, and
whatever happens, so be it," he said.

"We are staying here and whatever God wants, will happen eventually."

Meanwhile in Israel, Liron Berman, whose twin 27-year-old brothers
Gali and Ziv are being held hostage, has just found out that the pair
are alive.

"To get the sign of life from my brothers is a lot for us, this is
amazing," he told the BBC, his voice shaking with emotion.

"It lifts us up a little bit and we are fighting with urgency to get
them out."

But he said their only chance was to keep the deal.

"My family's mission is to make sure the deal to release the hostages
will remain. Only through releasing the hostages will the ceasefire
stay in place," he says.

Vicki Cohen - whose son Nimrod was taken hostage by Hamas on 7 October
2023 - spoke plainly about the situation.

"It is a matter of life and death," she said. "They are in danger any
minute."

She said the most recent release of hostages had sharpened fears.

Last week, three male hostages were paraded in front of the cameras by
Hamas gunmen during a stage-managed handover inside Gaza. The trio
appeared gaunt and sunken-eyed.

"I am so afraid and so worried for my son," she said.

In an appeal to Netanyahu to ensure the hostages' return, she said:
"Do the right thing... do what is good for the whole society."

Her concerns were echoed by Dudi Zalmanovich, another relative of one
of the hostages still being held captive by Hamas.

His 22-year-old nephew Omer Shem Tov was supposed to be among those
due to be freed during the first phase of the ceasefire because he has
a health condition.

"This news around the possibility that the deal will stop is really
frightening us," Mr Zalmanovich said.

Like Vicki, he said the "very, very bad" physical condition of the
recently released hostages had heightened his anxiety.

Now, Mr Zalmanovich said he feared "any excuse" could be used to
collapse the deal.

_Additional reporting by Michael Shuval and BBC Arabic._
