SOUTH KOREA: DEATH TOLL IN 'WORST EVER' WILDFIRES RISES TO 24

AT LEAST 24 DEAD IN SOUTH KOREA'S 'WORST EVER FIRES'

At least 24 people have been killed as multiple wildfires continue to
ravage South Korea's south-east region.

Most of the victims are in their 60s and 70s, say authorities, adding
that some 26 people are injured - with 12 in critical condition - as
the deadly wildfires have forced more than 23,000 people to flee their
homes.

The "unprecedented" crisis remains critical and is "rewriting the
record books for the worst wildfires in our nation's history", said
acting president Han Duck-soo.

The fires gutted the 1,300-year-old Gounsa temple in Uiseong city,
where many cultural relics were removed and transported to safer
ground.

The fires started in Sancheong county on Friday afternoon and later
spread to Uiseong county, authorities said.

Fuelled by strong and dry winds, the fires are advancing to the
neighbouring counties of Andong, Cheongsong, Yeongyang and Yeongdeok,
Yonhap news agency reported.

The Uiseong blaze is spreading at an "unimaginable" scale and speed,
Lee Byung-doo, a forest disaster expert at the National Institute of
Forest Science, told Reuters.

A firefighting helicopter crashed in the mountains of Uiseong county
just after midday on Wednesday, according to authorities, who are
investigating the cause.

Thousands of firefighters and about 5,000 military personnel have been
deployed to contain multiple blazes, as well as helicopters from the
US military stationed in Korea.

'IT WAS LIKE THE APOCALYPSE'

On Tuesday, the national fire agency said it had raised the crisis to
the highest fire response level, the first time this year such an
alert has been issued.

Wildfires are relatively uncommon in South Korea, and related
fatalities are rare. The current fires, which have killed 18 people
within the past few days, are already the deadliest in the country's
history.

About 17,000 hectares (42,000 acres) of forest have also been
destroyed, making the fires the third largest in South Korea's history
in terms of area.

The blazes raging in the city of Uiseong burned down the Gounsa
temple, built in 618 AD, which was one of the largest temples in the
province.

A Buddhist architectural structure deemed a national treasure from the
Joseon Dynasty (1392-1910) was also destroyed, forestry authorities
confirmed.

A 68-year-old monk said he was "devastated" when he heard that about
the destruction of the Gounsa temple.

"We will do our best to restore the function of the temple."

"It was an extremely painful feeling, and I wondered why something
like this could happen," Joung-ou told news agency AFP.

In Andong, truck driver Lee Seung-joo said he saw the mountains burn
like "literal hell" as he drove by.

"It was like the apocalypse," the 39-year-old said, according to an
AFP report.

Elsewewhere in Andong, evacuees who were sheltering at an elementary
school were told to leave quickly as the fire was spread by gusty
winds.

"The wind was so strong," said 79-year-old Kwon So-han told AFP. "The
fire came from the mountain and fell on my house."

Acting president Han said all available personnel and equipment have
been deployed, but strong winds continue to hamper the support
efforts.

"We were desperately hoping for rain today or tomorrow to help
extinguish the flames," Han added.

"This level of wildfire damage is unlike anything we've experienced
before."

There was no rain forecast for the region on Wednesday and only a
small amount - five to 10mm - expected on Thursday, according to the
Korea Meteorological Administration.

Han said the government will thoroughly review all shortcomings in the
wildfire response once the crisis is controlled and seek to improve
prevention strategies for the future.

"Once a wildfire starts, extinguishing it requires tremendous
resources and puts precious lives in danger," he said.

South Korea has been experiencing drier than normal conditions with
less rainfall than average. There have already been 244 wildfires this
year - 2.4 times more than the same period last year.

The government also promised to strengthen enforcement against illegal
burning -one of the main causes of wildfires - and crack down on
individual carelessness.
