MORE THAN 50 UNIVERSITIES FACE FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS AS PART OF
TRUMP'S ANTI-DEI CAMPAIGN

Linda McMahon, President Donald Trump’s nominee to be Secretary of
Education, testifies during her Senate Health, Education, Labor and
Pensions Committee confirmation hearing in the Dirksen Senate Office
Building on February 13, 2025 in Washington, DC. 
Win Mcnamee | Getty Images

More than 50 universities are being investigated for alleged racial
discrimination as part of President Donald Trump's campaign to end
diversity, equity and inclusion programs that his officials say
exclude white and Asian American students.

The Education Department announced the new investigations Friday, one
month after issuing a memo warning America's schools and colleges that
they could lose federal money over "race-based preferences" in
admissions, scholarships or any aspect of student life.

"Students must be assessed according to merit and accomplishment, not
prejudged by the color of their skin," Education Secretary Linda
McMahon said in a statement. "We will not yield on this commitment."

Most of the new inquiries are focused on colleges' partnerships with
the PhD Project, a nonprofit that helps students from underrepresented
groups get degrees in business with the goal of diversifying the
business world.

Department officials said that the group limits eligibility based on
race and that colleges that partner with it are "engaging in
race-exclusionary practices in their graduate programs."

The group of 45 colleges facing scrutiny over ties to the PhD Project
include major public universities such as Arizona State, Ohio State
and Rutgers, along with prestigious private schools like Yale,
Cornell, Duke and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

A message sent to the PhD Project was not immediately returned.

Six other colleges are being investigated for awarding "impermissible
race-based scholarships," the department said, and another is accused
of running a program that segregates students on the basis of race.

Those seven are: Grand Valley State University, Ithaca College, the
New England College of Optometry, the University of Alabama, the
University of Minnesota, the University of South Florida and the
University of Tulsa School of Medicine.

The department did not say which of the seven was being investigated
for allegations of segregation.

The Feb. 14 memo from Trump's Republican administration was a sweeping
expansion of a 2023 Supreme Court decision that barred colleges from
using race as a factor in admissions.

That decision focused on admissions policies at Harvard and the
University of North Carolina, but the Education Department said it
will interpret the decision to forbid race-based policies in any
aspect of education, both in K-12 schools and higher education.

In the memo, Craig Trainor, acting assistant secretary for civil
rights, had said schools' and colleges' diversity, equity and
inclusion efforts have been "smuggling racial stereotypes and explicit
race-consciousness into everyday training, programming and discipline.

The memo is being challenged in federal lawsuits from the nation's two
largest teachers' unions. The suits say the memo is too vague and
violates the free speech rights of educators.

