HAMAS FIRES ROCKETS AT TEL AVIV AS ISRAEL RENEWS GAZA GROUND CAMPAIGN

Hamas says it launched three rockets at Tel Aviv - the first time the
group is known to have fired back since Israel resumed its military
offensive in Gaza.

Israel said it intercepted one of the missiles and the others fell
into uninhabited land.

At least 591 people - including more than 200 children - have been
killed since Israel resumed fighting on Tuesday, according to the
Hamas-run Gaza health ministry.

The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said on Thursday that it had started a
ground operation in the Palestinian territory.

There had been a reprieve from large-scale military action since
January, when a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas began.

The IDF said late on Thursday that soldiers had begun "conducting
ground activity" in Rafah, which lies in the south of the territory
near the Egyptian border.

It said in a statement that troops had "dismantled... terrorist
infrastructure", adding that IDF forces were also continuing ground
activity in north and central Gaza.

Earlier, Israel's military said it had begun "targeted ground
activities" to create what it called a "partial buffer between the
north and south" of Gaza. It called the action a "limited ground
operation".

IDF spokesperson Col Avichay Adraee said forces were deployed up to
the centre of a strip, known as the Netzarim Corridor, which divides
northern and southern Gaza.

Israeli government spokesman, David Mencer, blamed Hamas for the
resumption of violence, saying it had "forced this escalation, it
rejected every hostage deal, including the offers mediated by the US
and others".

Israel resumed attacks on Tuesday as talks to extend the ceasefire
deal failed to progress, warning that they would intensify until Hamas
released the remaining hostages.

Israel says Hamas is still holding 59 hostages, 24 of whom are
believed to still be alive.

Meanwhile, five staff members of the UN's Palestinian refugee agency
Unrwa were among those killed over the "past few days", the agency's
chief Philippe Lazzarini said in a post on X.

"They were teachers, doctors and nurses," he added, warning that "the
worst is yet to come" amid the ongoing ground invasion.

On Wednesday, the UN said that one of its workers had been killed
after its compound in Deir al-Balah in central Gaza was damaged. While
it said the circumstances remain unclear, UN Office for Project
Services head Jorge Moreira said it was "not an accident" and "at
least an incident".

Gaza's health ministry blamed an Israeli strike, which it said injured
five others. Israel's military said it did not attack the compound but
was investigating the incident.

The US - a major weapons supplier to Israel - said that it was
committed to international law regarding the supply of weapons
supplies.

White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt said US President Donald
Trump "fully supports Israel and the IDF in the actions that they've
taken in recent days".

UK Foreign Secretary David Lammy confirmed on Thursday that a UK
national had been wounded in the compound attack. It comes after a
charity said one of its workers, a 51-year-old British bomb disposal
expert, had been injured.

"Our priority is supporting them and their family at this time," he
told MPs.

At the Nasser Hospital in Khan Younis, southern Gaza, Qasim Abu
Sharqiya said his two-year-old son, Omar, had been born through in
vitro fertilisation (IVF) after five years of trying.

"They bombed a tent next to us and he died," he told AFP. "Omar is my
only son, oh world, and I have no one else."

A doctor there, Tanya Haj Hassan, told the BBC's Newshour that she had
heard of at least 76 people who "didn't even make it into the ER" but
were taken "straight to the mortuary".

She recalled "a level of horror and evil that is really hard to
articulate - it felt like Armageddon".

Thousands of Israelis joined anti-Netanyahu protests in Jerusalem and
Tel Aviv, calling for the return of the hostages.

Several arrests were made, with police in Jerusalem deploying a water
cannon against demonstrators.

Elsewhere, Yemen's Houthi rebels fired a ballistic missile at Israel
on Thursday, aiming for Ben Gurion Airport near Tel Aviv, the
Iran-backed group's military spokesperson said.

No injuries were reported and the IDF said the missile was stopped
before entering Israel.

Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said on Tuesday that it had
"resumed combat in full force" and any ceasefire negotiations would
now take place "under fire".

A group representing hostages' families has accused the Israeli
government of choosing "to give up the hostages" by launching new
strikes.

Israel and Hamas have failed to agree how to take the ceasefire beyond
the first phase, which expired on 1 March.

Hamas did not agree to a renegotiation of the ceasefire on Israel's
terms, although it offered to release a living American hostage and
four hostages' bodies as mediators tried to prolong the ceasefire.

Israel blocked all food, fuel and medical supplies entering Gaza at
the beginning of March in order to put pressure on Hamas. It accused
Hamas of commandeering the provisions as part of its strategy against
Israel, though did not provide evidence for this claim.

The war was triggered by Hamas's attack on Israel on 7 October 2023,
in which about 1,200 people, mainly civilians, were killed and 251
other taken hostage. Twenty-five Israeli and five Thai hostages were
released alive during the first phase of the ceasefire.

Israel responded to the 7 October attack with a massive military
offensive, which had killed more than 48,500 Palestinians, mainly
civilians, before Israel resumed its campaign, the Hamas-run health
ministry says. Israel's offensive has also caused huge amounts of
destruction to homes and infrastructure.
