RUSSIA SAYS SANCTIONS MUST BE LIFTED BEFORE UKRAINE MARITIME CEASEFIRE
CAN START

Russia has said some Western sanctions must be lifted before it begins
a maritime ceasefire with Ukraine.

Within hours of the US announcing the two sides had agreed to halt
strikes in the Black Sea in separate deals, the Kremlin said it would
only take place once sanctions on a number of Russian banks were
lifted.

The demands include revoking sanctions on the state agricultural bank
Rosselkhozbank and restoring the firms' access to the Swift
international payment system.

Overnight, Moscow launched a drone attack on the port city of
Mykolaiv, Ukrainian officials said, with President Volodymyr Zelensky
saying the strikes were "a clear signal" Russia did not want peace.

After Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the EU and its allies
suspended access to Swift for a number of Russian financial
institutions.

The aim was for Russian companies to lose access to the normal smooth
and instant transactions provided by Swift, disrupting payments for
its valuable energy and agricultural exports.

Reversing that decision would need EU approval, a step that would
appear uncertain in light of recent European statements of support for
Kyiv.

A European Commission spokesperson said the withdrawal of all Russian
forces from Ukraine would be one of the main conditions to lift or
amend any sanctions.

On Tuesday, US President Donald Trump said that Russia could be trying
to delay ending the war.

"I think that Russia wants to see an end to it, but it could be
they're dragging their feet. I've done it over the years," he said in
an interview with Newsmax.

The maritime ceasefire was announced by the US after three days of
peace talks in Saudi Arabia.

However Kyiv and Moscow later released conflicting statements on the
details of the deal, including when and how it would start.

Zelensky said he believed the deal did not require sanctions relief to
come into force and would take effect immediately.

He called the Kremlin's statement an attempt to "manipulate" the
deals.

After announcing the agreement on Tuesday, Washington said all parties
would continue working toward a "durable and lasting peace", adding
that the agreement would reopen an important trade route.

Ukraine and Russia also committed to "develop measures" to implement a
previously agreed ban on attacking each other's energy infrastructure,
the White House said.

The Black Sea is located south of Ukraine and to the west of Russia,
and is also bordered by Romania, Bulgaria, Turkey, and Georgia.

It is also bordered by parts of Russian-occupied Ukraine - including
Crimea.

It is a vital shipping route for Ukrainian exports, and after Russia
pulled out of the Black Sea Grain Initiative in 2023, it said it would
view any vessel bound for Ukraine as a potential military target.

As a result, Ukraine's grain exports slumped.
