SERBIA: GOVERNMENT DENIES USING 'SONIC CANNON' AT PROTESTS

GOVERNMENT DENIES USING 'SONIC CANNON' AT SERBIA PROTESTS

For a few seconds, there was only pure panic, as chaos and fear surged
through the crowd at a major anti-government protest in Serbia. What
started as confusion has since spiralled into questions over whether
an illegal sonic weapon was used to silence the demonstration.

A large crowd of protesters in Belgrade were observing a 15-minute
silence on Saturday evening in honour of the 15 people killed when
part of a railway station collapsed in Novi Sad in November.

Then, out of nowhere, a loud, jarring noise shattered the quiet.

The mood shifted in an instant. The crowd surged towards the pavement
in panic. I was swept along with them. People scattered in all
directions.

At first, many thought the noise was an emergency vehicle, after what
had sounded like a car crash. But there were no sirens.

Then came the rumours. Claims emerged that a sonic weapon – a device
capable of causing pain, dizziness, and hearing damage – had been
deployed against the peaceful protesters.

Serbian officials have denied these reports, rejecting allegations
that security forces deployed a military-grade Long Range Acoustic
Device (LRAD) – also known as a "sonic cannon" – during the
demonstration.

The Serbian army has stated that it neither possesses nor has ever
used a sonic cannon.

In an interview with Serbia's state-owned broadcaster RTS, military
Brigadier General Slavko Rakić said: "A sonic cannon uses a sound
system that is amplified well above the sound system of humans and
other living things. What we saw is nothing like that.

"The effect that is achieved is an amplified sound recording and it
should be audible, but that is not present in the recordings."

The public prosecutor's office in Belgrade has instructed the Ministry
of Internal Affairs to investigate the incident.

Between 275,000 and 325,000 people were estimated to have taken part
in the protest. The government put the attendance at 107,000.

One of the places where protesters gathered was outside Belgrade's
bright-yellow Student Cultural Centre in the heart of the Serbian
capital.

For more than four months, students have blockaded their universities
and organised protests, demanding that those responsible for the
railway station collapse be brought to justice.

Eyewitnesses who spoke to BBC Serbian reported hearing the noise, but
the intensity varied depending on where they stood in the crowd.

Some likened it to the roar of a Formula One race, while others said
it sounded like an airplane flying low overhead, or even an MRI
machine.

"It was like being on the starting line of a Grand Prix," said
43-year-old protester Ivan Vasic. "I didn't feel anything afterwards,
but my wife complained of a bad headache that lasted until late in the
night."

Other protesters described feeling vertigo-like sensations.

"It was a horrible sound. It was so powerful, and it felt like
something was going to crash on to our heads," said 37-year-old Lela
Sredojevic.

"I had never felt anything like that. I was really scared. It lasted
less than a minute, but in that moment, it felt like eternity."

The tool at the centre of these claims is called a Long Range Acoustic
Device (LRAD) – commonly known as a sonic weapon or sonic cannon.

LRADs can focus sound waves at high intensities, causing pain, nausea,
and disorientation and their use is prohibited under Serbian police
law.

"Sonic systems are a more recent development, emerging in the early
2000s," BBC Russian's defence correspondent Pavel Aksenov said.

"They can target either crowds or individuals, and have been used by
police and military units in a number of countries to suppress riots,
disperse demonstrations, guard checkpoints, or even protect ships from
pirate attacks."

He added that, although these weapons are classified as non-lethal,
they can still cause harm to human health and their impact is hard to
regulate.

Trevor Cox, professor of Acoustic Engineering at the University of
Salford, told the BBC that a sound loud enough to cause the symptoms
many reported should be more audible in the footage circulating on
social media.

"If people are noticing either a ringing in the ear or a temporary
threshold shift – like when you come out of a night club and you are
slightly deaf – it indicates sound that is loud enough to cause
temporary damage to your hearing," he said.

"That's quite serious because that can become permanent."

However, Prof Cox also suggested the incident might not have involved
a "sonic weapon".

"Even if the sound wasn't loud enough to cause hearing damage, it
could still trigger a fight-or-flight response and a mass crowd
reaction. Tinnitus can also be triggered by stress," he said.

Jürgen Altmann, a physicist who has studied acoustic weapons and
their effects, told the BBC that the noise "seems to have been
produced by a strong acoustic source, maybe a device from the LRAD
family", but added that "other mechanisms are possible".

A group of six Serbian NGOs said in a joint statement: "From 500
reports from citizens and their testimonies, it is clear that during
the protest on 15 March, there was a strong sonic boom, which caused a
series of physical and psychological reactions among those present."

They added: "According to testimonies, those present felt a strong
sound impact, followed by a wave of heat or wind."

Despite the chaos, there is little expectation that this movement will
subside.

Large demonstrations are expected to resume as soon as this week, and
smaller protests, like one involving around 500 students on Monday,
are becoming routine.

A young female protester summed it up: "Literally everyone I know went
to the protest. Usually, people make excuses. Now everyone is on their
way."

_Additional reporting by Daniel Wittenberg_
