FBI LAUNCHES TESLA THREATS TASK FORCE: 'THIS IS DOMESTIC TERRORISM'

In this article

	* TSLA

Follow your favorite stocksCREATE FREE ACCOUNT

Burned Teslas are shown at a Tesla Collision Center after an
individual used incendiary devices to set several vehicles on fire on
March 18, 2025 in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Ethan Miller | Getty Images

The FBI said on Monday that it has launched a task force to
investigate scores of attacks in recent weeks targeting Tesla, the
electric vehicle company headed by Trump administration DOGE chief
Elon Musk.

The announcement of the task force, which is operating in conjunction
with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, came
hours after a bomb squad found multiple incendiary devices at a Tesla
showroom in Austin, Texas, the same city where the company has its
headquarters.

That incident is the latest in a series of attacks and vandalism on
Tesla properties related to CEO Musk's DOGE team.

DOGE, or the Department of Government Efficiency, is engaged in a
wide-ranging effort to sharply cut federal government spending and
staffing.

There have been at least 80 reported cases of vandalism or arson of
Tesla vehicles in the United States and Canada, in addition to
peaceful protests at Tesla showrooms, NBC News reported.

Police take security measures as demonstrators gather outside a Tesla
showroom for a protest dubbed 'Tesla Takedown' against the company's
CEO, Elon Musk (not seen), in New York, United States on March 13,
2025. 
Selcuk Acar | Anadolu | Getty Images

"The FBI has been investigating the increase in violent activity
toward Tesla, and over the last few days, we have taken additional
steps to crack down and coordinate our response," FBI Director Kash
Patel said in a post Monday on X, the social media site owned by Musk.

"This is domestic terrorism," Patel wrote in that tweet. "Those
responsible will be pursued, caught, and brought to justice."

FBI Deputy Director Dan Bongino tweeted, "Justice is coming."

The New York Post first reported news of the task force.

Laurie Shelby, Tesla's vice president of Environment, Health and
Safety and Security, did not immediately respond to CNBC when asked
what the company is doing to protect its facilities.

Musk at a Tesla event on Thursday referenced the spate of vandalism on
Tesla vehicles and sites.

"If you read the news, it feels like, you know, Armageddon," Musk told
employees.

The CEO said that anyone burning Tesla vehicles was "psycho" and
should "stop being psycho!"

Investigators look over the scene at a Tesla Collision Center after an
individual used incendiary devices to set several vehicles on fire on
March 18, 2025 in Las Vegas, Nevada. 
Ethan Miller | Getty Images

 A Tesla employee told CNBC that there had not been any company-wide
communications about protests or criminal acts targeting the company
since Thursday's all-hands event.

President Donald Trump, Attorney General Pam Bondi and Commerce
Secretary Howard Lutnick in recent weeks have defended Tesla and
condemned the attacks on its vehicles.

Bondi last week highlighted the arrests of several people in
connection with vandalism of Tesla vehicles, while Trump suggested
that people convicted of such crimes could be sent to serve any
sentence in prisons in El Salvador.

A drone view of Tesla cars parked outside a Tesla showroom as police
investigates a report of vandalism to dozens of vehicles in Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada March 20, 2025. 
Carlos Osorio | Reuters

Trump and Musk earlier this month held an event on the White House
lawn showing off Tesla vehicles to reporters. Trump said he would buy
one for himself, and said he had already purchased a Tesla Cybertruck
for his granddaughter Kai Trump.

Lutnick, in a Fox News interview on Wednesday, urged people to "Buy
Tesla" stock.

Tesla shares closed trading Monday at $278.39 per share, more than 40%
lower than the stock's 52-week high of $488.54 per share, which it hit
in mid-December.

Over the weekend, a man was arrested for allegedly driving his car
toward protesters outside a Tesla showroom in West Palm Beach,
Florida, on Saturday.

"The protestors had to move out of the way in order to avoid being
struck by the vehicle," the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office said in
a statement on the arrest of the man, Andrew Dutil.

Dutil was charged with aggravated assault with a deadly weapon without
intent to kill.

NBC News reported that Dutil's Facebook account had shared content
supporting Trump.

A group called "Tesla Takedown" is calling for protests on Saturday
outside of the nearly 300 Tesla showrooms in the United States.

"Elon Musk is destroying our democracy, and he's using the fortune he
built at Tesla to do it," the group says on its webpage. "We are
taking action at Tesla to stop Musk's illegal coup."

A spokesperson for Tesla Takedown in an email told CNBC, "The US
government has a long history of conflating peaceful protest with
violence."

"The #TeslaTakedown movement has been & always will be nonviolent,"
the spokesperson said. "They want to scare us away from protesting
Musk's destruction — but standing up for free speech is essential to
democracy. We will not be deterred."

"We don't support violence against Tesla," the spokesperson said.

_— CNBC'S __LORA KOLODNY__ CONTRIBUTED TO THIS ARTICLE_

THIS IS BREAKING NEWS. PLEASE REFRESH FOR UPDATES.

