TRUMP AND INTELLIGENCE CHIEFS PLAY DOWN SIGNAL GROUP CHAT LEAK

US President Donald Trump and his intelligence chiefs have played down
a security breach that saw a journalist invited into a Signal
group chat where he reported seeing national security officials
plan airstrikes in Yemen.

US Director of National Intelligence Tulsi Gabbard and CIA Director
John Ratcliffe denied at a Senate hearing that any classified
information was shared in the message chain. Defence Secretary Pete
Hegseth also faced scrutiny for the messages, though he did not
testify.

Democrats on the panel rebuked the cabinet members
as "incompetent" with national security.

Over at the White House, Trump stood by National Security Adviser Mike
Waltz, who was at the centre of the leak.

Waltz came close to apologising by Tuesday evening, telling Fox News:
"I take full responsibility. I built the group."

"It's embarrassing. We're going to get to the bottom of it."

Asked if he had identified who on his staff was at fault, he
responded, "a staffer wasn't responsible," and repeated that the error
was his "full responsibility".

Waltz also said that he had spoken to Elon Musk, who is leading the
unofficial Department of Government Efficiency and has touted himself
as "tech support" for the federal government.

"We've got the best technical minds looking at how this happened,"
Waltz continued, adding that Goldberg "wasn't on my phone".

The revelation has sent shockwaves through Washington, prompting a
lawsuit and questions about why high-ranking officials discussed such
sensitive matters on a potentially vulnerable civilian app.

Atlantic magazine editor-in-chief Jeffrey Goldberg was added to the
18-member group, apparently by accident, and reported that he
initially thought it was a hoax.

But he said he realised the messages were authentic once the planned
raid was carried out in Yemen.

Some 53 people were killed in the 15 March airstrikes, which US
officials said targeted Iran-aligned Houthi rebels who have threatened
maritime trade and Israel.

The American raids have continued since then, including early on
Tuesday morning.

In addition to Ratcliffe and Gabbard, the Signal group chat included
Vice-President JD Vance and White House chief of staff Susie Wiles.

SENATORS ASK FOR ANSWERS

The controversy overshadowed Tuesday's hearing before the Senate
Intelligence Committee, which was originally meant to focus on drug
cartels and people trafficking.

During the at-times combative session, Ratcliffe said he was not aware
of any specific operational information on weapons, targets or timings
discussed in the chat, as Goldberg had reported.

Asked if he believed the leak was a huge mistake, Ratcliffe said:
"No."

Gabbard repeatedly said "no classified information" was divulged and
maintained there was a difference between "inadvertent release" and
"malicious leaks" of information.

Both pointed to Hegseth as being the authority on whether the
information was classified. Goldberg reported that much of the most
sensitive information shared in the chat came from the account under
Hegseth's name.

"The Secretary of Defense is the original classification authority for
DoD in deciding what would be classified information," Ratcliffe said.

Senate Democrats assailed the Gabbard and Ratcliffe.

Colorado's Michael Bennet accused those involved in the chat of
sloppiness, incompetence and disrespect for US intelligence agencies.

Georgia's Jon Ossoff described the episode - which Washington has
dubbed Signalgate - as an "embarrassment".

"This is utterly unprofessional. There's been no apology," Ossoff
said. "There has been no recognition of the gravity of this error."

Republicans on the panel were far more muted in their misgivings.

"We dodged a bullet," said Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina.

Mississippi Republican Roger Wicker, who leads the Senate's armed
services committee, later told reporters that lawmakers will
investigate the Signal chat leak.

Wicker told reporters that he wants the investigation to be bipartisan
and for the committee to have full access to the group chat's
transcript.

"We need to find out if it's completely factual, and then make
recommendations," he told the NewsNation network. "But I expect we'll
have the co-operation of the administration."

Republican Jim Risch of Idaho, who leads the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, also said that he expects the matter to be investigated.

"This is a matter that's going to be investigated, obviously, we're
going to know a lot more about it as the facts role out," he said,
quoted by The Hill newspaper.

TRUMP DEFENDS HIS TEAM AMID BACKLASH

Trump and his White House team cast the controversy as a "co-ordinated
effort" to distract from the president's accomplishments.

Throughout the day, Trump played down the leak and defended his
national security adviser who was reported to have admitted Goldberg
to the group chat.

"Michael Waltz has learned a lesson, and he's a good man," Trump told
NBC in a morning phone interview. He also said Goldberg's addition to
the group was a "glitch" that had "no impact at all" operationally.

The Republican president indicated it was one of Waltz's aides who had
invited the journalist to the chat.

"A staffer had his number on there," said Trump, who has long
pilloried reporting by Goldberg going back to the 2020 election.

At an event later at the White House, Trump was joined by Waltz.

"There was no classified information, as I understand it," said the
president. "They used an app, if you want to call it an app, that a
lot of people use, a lot of people in government use, a lot of people
in the media use."

In his own brief remarks, Waltz took aim at Goldberg. He said he had
never had any contact with the reporter and accused him of wanting to
focus on "more hoaxes", rather than Trump administration successes.

Trump later spoke to Newsmax, where he told the conservative network
that "somebody that was on the line with permission, somebody that was
with Mike Waltz, worked with Mike Waltz at a lower level, had, I guess
Goldberg's" phone number.

Some national security experts have argued that the leak was a major
operational lapse, and archive experts warned that it violated laws on
presidential record keeping.

On Tuesday, the non-partisan watchdog group American Oversight sued
the individual officials who participated in the chat for alleged
violations of the Federal Records Act and Administrative Procedure
Act.

The group said that by setting the chat to automatically delete
messages, the group violated a law requiring White House officials to
submit their records to the National Archives.

The National Security Agency warned employees only last month of
vulnerabilities in Signal, according to documents obtained by the
BBC's US partner CBS.

Signal issued a new statement on Tuesday disputing "vulnerabilities"
in its messaging platform.

"Signal is open source, so our code is regularly scrutinized in
addition to regular formal audits," the statement said, calling the
app "the gold standard for private, secure communications".

Mick Mulroy, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defence (DASD) for
the Middle East and a retired CIA paramilitary officer, told the BBC
that holding sensitive discussions on a "unsure commercial
application" was "unacceptable".

"And everyone on that chat knew it," he added. "You do not need to be
a member of the military or intelligence community to know that this
information is exactly what the enemy would want to know."
