ISRAEL-GAZA WAR: PARENTS OF FREED HAMAS HOSTAGES GIVE DETAILS OF
ORDEAL

STARVED, THREATENED AND ABUSED: PARENTS OF FREED HAMAS HOSTAGES GIVE
DETAILS OF ORDEAL

Parents of four young female Israeli hostages freed from Hamas
captivity in Gaza have told the BBC about how their daughters were
abused, including being starved, intimidated and threatened by armed
men, and forced to cook and clean.

They recounted how the hostages were held in underground tunnels and
buildings, witnessed physical abuse and were made to participate in
Hamas propaganda videos, including, in one case, by faking her own
death.

They said the women found strength through sharing stories, drawing
and keeping a diary.

None of the women have given interviews to the media since their
release, and their parents say the full details of what they endured
are still emerging. There are also things they can't speak about due
to fears it could put the hostages still in Gaza at risk.

Three of the four women whose parents spoke to the BBC were female
soldiers kidnapped by Hamas from the Nahal Oz army base near Gaza on 7
October 2023.

The hostages' access to food and their treatment by male guards varied
over the 15 months they were held, their parents said. They were moved
between locations, rarely seeing sunlight.

"It was very different between the places that she went - it could be
a good tunnel, it could be a very bad tunnel. It could be a good house
or a bad house," said the father of Agam Berger, 20, a soldier who had
been at Nahal Oz.

Some of the places had good food, some had "very bad food... they just
tried to survive," Shlomi Berger said.

"They [and their captors] had to run away from one place to another
because they are in a war zone there. It was very dangerous to be
there," said Orly Gilboa, whose daughter Daniella was also kidnapped
from the base.

When Daniella watched the release of three male hostages last week -
who came out thin and emaciated - she told her mother: "If I had been
released two months ago I would have probably looked like them."

"She got thinner, she lost a lot of her weight through the captivity.
But in the last two months they were given a lot of food to gain
weight," Ms Gilboa says.

Other parents have also reported significant weight loss. Meirav
Leshem Gonen's daughter was taken by Hamas from the Nova music
festival.

Romi, 24, was released in the first week of the ceasefire in January -
she had lost "20% of her body weight", says her mother.

Ms Gilboa says the hardest thing she endured was seeing a video that
suggested her daughter had been killed. Her captors poured powder on
her so she looked like she was covered in plaster, as if she was
killed in an Israeli military strike.

"I think everyone who saw it believed it, but I just kept telling
myself that it can't be," she told the BBC.

The war was triggered by Hamas's unprecedented attack on Israel on 7
October 2023, when gunmen killed about 1,200 people and took another
251 hostage.

More than 48,230 people have been killed in Gaza since, according to
the territory's Hamas-run health ministry. About two-thirds of Gaza's
buildings have been destroyed or damaged, estimates the UN.

So far, 16 Israeli and five Thai hostages have been exchanged for more
than 600 Palestinian prisoners held in Israel under the ceasefire deal
that began on 19 January.

Mr Berger says his daughter, Agam, was threatened by her captors and
witnessed physical abuse while in captivity.

"Sometimes they tortured other female hostages in front of her eyes,"
he says, referring specifically to an assault on Amit Soussana, a
former hostage who was released in November 2023.

Mr Berger says his daughter told him how they were constantly watched
over by armed men, "playing all the time with their guns and their
hand grenades".

He says the male captors treated the women with "big disrespect",
including forcing them to clean and prepare food.

"That was really bothering her. She's a girl that if she has something
to say, she'll say it. She's not shy. And sometimes she told them what
she was thinking about them and their behaviour," he says.

He adds that in a small act of resistance, Agam had refused to perform
any jobs on the Sabbath, the Jewish day of rest. The men detaining her
accepted this.

They were also not allowed to speak loudly.

"When Agam came [back to Israel] she wanted to speak all the time...
After a day, she had no voice because she'd spoken so much," Mr Berger
says.

Yoni Levy, whose daughter Naama, 20, was also taken from the army
base, says she was sometimes held in locations where there was a TV or
radio playing.

Once, Naama saw her father talking on TV. "It gave her a lot of hope
and optimism... that nobody would forget her, and we'll do whatever is
needed to take her out of this hell."

He says for Naama, the Hamas attack on the army base was "much more
traumatic than the captivity itself".

"It may change but at this stage we think that this is the most tragic
day that she's talked about," Mr Levy says.

Footage of Naama that day shows her and other female soldiers in
bloodstained clothing surrounded by armed men in a room at the base
before being forced into a vehicle and taken to Gaza.

The three female soldiers whose parents spoke to the BBC are among
five from an all-women unarmed military unit at Nahal Oz freed in the
first round of the ceasefire.

Members of the unit, known in Hebrew as Tatzpitaniyot, are tasked with
observing the Gaza border and looking for signs of anything
suspicious. Survivors and relatives of some of those killed that day
say that they had been warning for months that Hamas had been
preparing for an attack.

A few days before the 7 October attack, Daniella had been at home on a
break from service. She had told her mother then: "Mummy, when I go
back to the army, there's going to be a war."

"I didn't think it was going to be such a war and of course that my
daughter would be taken hostage," Ms Gilboa says.

Ms Gilboa and the families of the two other observers who spoke to the
BBC say they are joining calls for an inquiry into what happened.

They say their daughters remain concerned about the conditions of
those still in Gaza and have called for the ceasefire to continue.

Meanwhile, Ms Leshem Gonen says she is still learning what happened to
her daughter Romi.

She was shot at the Nova music festival and her mother says she was
not properly treated, leaving her with "an open wound where she could
see the bone".

"This is something we can know and that she speaks about. The other
things, I think it will take time."

Ms Leshem Gonen says Romi described her release in the first week of
the truce as "intimidating" and "frightening". She was surrounded by
gunmen and crowds. But the moment of their reunion was "so powerful".

The parents also described how their daughters had found ways to get
through each day in captivity - through drawing, making notes or
sharing stories with each other.

"They wrote as much as they could, every day - what was happening,
where were they moving, who were the guards and things like that,"
says Mr Berger.

While in captivity, the young women had dreamt about the things they
wanted to do when they got home: getting a haircut and eating sushi.

Daniella had drawn a butterfly with the word "freedom" while in
captivity - she now has that tattooed on her arm.

They are adapting to life back in Israel, and their families say they
are taking the recovery step by step.

The moment of reunion with his daughter Naama is still a blur, says Mr
Levy, but he remembers the emotion.

"The feeling was that... I will take care of you now, and everything's
going to be OK. Daddy's here. That's all. And then everything was
quiet."

_Additional reporting by Naomi Scherbel-Ball_
