JUDGE BLOCKS TRUMP'S TRANSGENDER MILITARY BAN

US President Donald Trump speaks at the Department of Justice in
Washington, DC, on March 14, 2025. 
Roberto Schmidt | AFP | Getty Images

A federal judge on Tuesday temporarily blocked the U.S. military from
enforcing President Donald Trump's executive order barring transgender
people from military service while a lawsuit by 20 current and
would-be service members challenging the measure goes forward.

U.S. District Judge Ana Reyes in Washington found Trump's January 27
order, one of several issued by the Republican president targeting
legal rights for transgender Americans, likely violated the U.S.
Constitution's prohibition on sex discrimination.

"The cruel irony is that thousands of transgender service members have
sacrificed — some risking their lives — to ensure for others the
very equal protection rights the military ban seeks to deny them,"
Reyes said.

Reyes was appointed by President Joe Biden, Trump's Democratic
predecessor.

Jennifer Levi, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, praised the court for
acting "decisively and swiftly."

"This ruling pulls no punches. The court methodically documented the
concrete harms this ban inflicts on brave transgender service members
who ask nothing more than to serve their country with honor," Levi
said in a statement.

Representatives of the White House and Pentagon did not immediately
respond to requests for comment.

In response to Trump's order, the military said on February 11 it
would no longer allow transgender individuals to join the military and
would stop performing or facilitating procedures associated with
gender transition for service members. Later that month, the military
said it would begin expelling transgender members.

Trump said in his order that "adoption of a gender identity
inconsistent with an individual's sex conflicts with a soldier's
commitment to an honorable, truthful, and disciplined lifestyle, even
in one's personal life."

Reyes said in her ruling the government had conceded the plaintiffs
were excellent soldiers and living proof "transgender persons can have
the warrior ethos, physical and mental health, selflessness, honor,
integrity, and discipline to ensure military excellence."

"So why discharge them and other decorated soldiers? Crickets from
defendants on this key question," Reyes said.

Trump issued a similar executive order during his first term, during
which already-serving transgender members were allowed to remain.

Plaintiffs in the lawsuit argued the order was illegal, pointing to a
2020 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that employment discrimination against
transgender people is a form of illegal sex discrimination.

Lawyers for the government have argued in court the military is
entitled to bar people with certain conditions that make them
unsuitable for service, also including bipolar disorder and eating
disorders. At a March 12 hearing, they told Reyes she should defer to
the judgment of the current administration that transgender people are
not fit for service.

The judge repeatedly pressed them to justify their stance with
evidence, and at times expressed open outrage at the order's language
denigrating the character of transgender people.

The military has about 1.3 million active-duty personnel, Department
of Defense data shows. While transgender rights advocates say there
are as many as 15,000 transgender service members, officials say the
number is in the low thousands.

