EUROPEAN LEADERS PUSH FOR EVEN MORE DEFENSE SPENDING — DESPITE PLANS
FOR $867 BILLION 'REARM' PACKAGE

The European Union has plans to step up its defense spending in a big
way — but some leaders want it to go even further as geopolitical
tensions heighten.

The European Commission, the executive arm of the EU, earlier this
month proposed measures that could bring about 800 billion euros ($867
billion) in new defense spending. These measures have yet to be
approved by the various EU capitals, but have been enough to boost EU
defense stocks since the plan was announced. 

The current measures are "an important step in the right direction,"
but "maybe we need to be more ambitious," Greek Prime Minister
Kyriakos Mitsotakis told CNBC's Silvia Amaro on the sidelines of a
European Council summit on Thursday.

The ReArm Europe plan, which was announced earlier this month,
includes 150 billion euros of loans that member states can access
to invest in defense and security capabilities. These funds will,
however, only be made available if at least 65% of the cost of
production takes place in the EU, Norway or Ukraine. 

Ukrainian army soldiers of the 22nd brigade during tank training as
Russia-Ukraine war continues in Donetsk Oblast, Ukraine on October 29,
2023. 
Diego Herrera Carcedo | Anadolu Agency | Getty Images

The proposal also allows for a temporary relaxation of the bloc's
fiscal rules to enable member states to use public funding for defense
on a national level. Lending from the European Investment Bank, the
EU's investment bank, would also be available. 

"I'm happy about the fact that member states now will have more fiscal
flexibility within the confines of the stability pack to spend more on
defense," Mitsotakis said, adding that perhaps the plan could go
further.

"This should not just be a question of loans, as is currently the
case. I think we also need to seriously discuss the possibility of a
facility, a joint borrowing facility, that would also offer grants to
member states," he said.

Other leaders, such as Latvian Prime Minister Evika Siliņa, struck a
similar tone.

She said she was supportive of the package that -- even a year ago --
likely would not have happened. The country has long been supportive
of a stronger Europe that spends more on security and defense, she
said.

"I believe we should discuss even more possibilities for financial
resources," Siliņa said, noting that administrative burdens also
needed to be reduced to support the military industry.

'THIS IS ONLY THE START'

Lithuanian President Gitanas Nausėda echoed calls for further
financial instruments to be included in the EU's defense plans.

"I think this is only the start," he told Amaro, explaining that
options such as grants also needed to be considered.

"We would like to see the mix, like in the case of [the] pandemic, we
would like to see the mix of instruments, borrowing and grants
mixing," he said.

Looking beyond the amount of cash allocated to defense spending,
Luxembourg's prime minister Luc Frieden said the most important
question is what it will be spent on.

"I think financing is always the second thing," he said. "You first
need to know what you are doing ... Then we need to finance, mainly
through our national budgets and in addition with some European
funds," he said.

"But first let's discuss how we do it, how we do it better, how we do
it more in common, more coordinated," Frieden added.

European Central Bank member and Bank of France Governor Francois
Villeroy de Galhau on Thursday seemed more hesitant about increasing
defense spending, however.

According to a Reuters translation, he told French broadcaster BFM TV
that while it was necessary for the country to ramp up defense
expenditures, "we cannot have a policy of spending whatever it takes."

