WHY IS IT A PROBLEM IF YEMEN STRIKE PLANS SHARED ON SIGNAL?

The leak of classified information by President Donald Trump's
national security team on an unsecured chat app may have broken three
basic rules, according to analysts.

Atlantic editor-in-chief Jeffrey Goldberg reported that he was
accidentally included in the 18-member Signal group and saw details of
imminent American strikes on Houthi rebels in Yemen.

The White House has acknowledged the messages reported by the Atlantic
appear to be authentic.

Here are three basic issues with using Signal to share high-level
information, experts told the BBC.

MESSAGING APPS ARE UNSECURED

Signal has gone from a platform favoured by dissidents to the
unofficial whisper network of Washington officialdom.

Privacy and tech experts say the popular end-to-end encrypted platform
is more secure than conventional texting.

The app is open-source, meaning its code is available for independent
experts to scour for vulnerabilities.

But like any messaging app with high-value targets, state-backed
hackers try to find a way into Signal chats. Google Threat
Intelligence Group has noticed increasing efforts to compromise the
platform by individuals of interest to Russia's intelligence services.

The app is not banned outright by the US government. Under President
Joe Biden, some officials were allowed to download Signal on their
White House-issued phones.

But they were instructed to use the app sparingly and never to share
classified information on it, former national security officials who
served in the Democratic administration told US media.

Pentagon regulations state that messaging apps "are NOT authorized to
access, transmit, process non-public DoD information", reports CNN.

Signal is used for communications by militaries around the world, the
app's president Meredith Whittaker told BBC News in December.

But a cybersecurity expert tells the BBC that using Signal to
communicate sensitive communications of this nature is risky.

"The channels that are generally used for communications within
government systems are monitored and well-secured from a usage
standpoint," said John Wheeler of Wheelhouse Advisors, a cybersecurity
consultancy.

With outside tools, he said, it appears there may be no authorisation
protocols in place.

"Something of this sensitive nature should really require some very
strict protocols in terms of communications," Wheelhouse told the BBC.
"I was very surprised that they would be using this sort of solution."

He added that this incident might make US partners abroad think twice
before communicating sensitive information to American officials.

CHAT MAY HAVE INCLUDED CLASSIFIED INFORMATION

Using a Signal chat to share highly classified information and
accidentally including a reporter on the discussion could raise the
possibility of violations of federal laws such as the Espionage Act.

It can be a crime to mishandle, misuse or abuse classified
information, though it is unclear whether such provisions might have
been breached in this case.

Mara Karlin, who served under six secretaries of state and was
assistant secretary of defence, told the BBC the leak is "stunning"
and "not normal".

Karlin said these types of conversations should take place in a secure
space, in the Pentagon or in the Situation Room in the White House,
not in a Signal group chat.

Sensitive government communications are required to take place in a
sealed-off room called a Sensitive Compartmentalised Information
Facility (Scif), where mobile phones are generally forbidden.

The US government has other systems in place to communicate classified
information, including the Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications
System (JWICS) and the Secret Internet Protocol Router (SIPR) network,
which top government officials can access via specifically configured
laptops and phones.

Karlin says she expects both allies and adversaries to pay attention
to this, saying they will ask: "Can the US government keep sensitive
information in a secure manner?"

Inspector general investigations and congressional investigations will
be carried out, Karlin predicts. "This is historic," she adds.

Samar Ali, a professor of politics and law at Vanderbilt University
who worked on counter-terrorism with the homeland security department
in the Obama administration, said of the leak: "It's baffling. It's
shocking. It's dangerous."

The text chain shows "a clear violation of our national security
laws", she told the BBC.

Prof Ali wonders what accountability the Trump team might face, and
notes that she would have lost her job and security clearance if she
committed any of these violations.

The White House has denied any classified information was shared on
the chat.

GOVERNMENT RECORDS MUST BE PRESERVED

Some of the Signal messages National Security Adviser Michael Waltz
sent to the chat were set to disappear after one week, Jeffrey
Goldberg reported in his article for the Atlantic.

If confirmed, that would raise questions about two federal laws that
require the preservation of government records: the Presidential
Records Act and the Federal Records Act.

"The law requires that electronic messages that take place on a
non-official account are preserved, in some fashion, on an official
electronic record keeping system," said Jason R Baron, a former
director of litigation at the National Archives and Records
Administration.

Such regulations would cover Signal, he said.

Official government communications are supposed to be either
automatically archived, or the individuals involved are supposed to
forward, copy or preserve the messages.

"The open question here is whether these communications were
automatically archived," Baron told the BBC. "It's not clear whether
that occurred."

It was also unclear whether the individuals in the chat had taken
other steps to preserve the records.

"We should all be concerned about the use of these electronic
messaging apps to evade federal record keeping requirements," Baron
said.
