FINAL PUSH FOR VOTES AS GERMAN FRONTRUNNER VOWS TO LEAD IN EUROPE

Germany's rival political leaders will take their fight for votes
right to the last minute in a push that reflects the pivotal nature of
Sunday's election, not just for their country but for Europe as a
whole.

Conservative frontrunner Friedrich Merz told supporters that under his
leadership, Germany would take responsibility in Europe, and that the
far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) would be consigned to the
political margins once more.

He will end his Christian Democrat party's campaign with a rally in
Munich, while his rivals will make a final appeal in a TV
"speed-dating" programme with voters.

For months German politics has been paralysed by the collapse of the
previous government.

Now, hopes have been raised across Europe that this vote will bring
some certainty to the EU's biggest democracy and its biggest economy,
which has struggled to escape from lingering recession.

Nothing will change overnight. No party can govern without forming a
coalition, and that will take weeks.

Reviving the economy has been one of the two big issues of the
campaign; the other has been migration and security, thrust on
Germany's politicians by a series of deadly attacks since May 2024.

The cities of Mannheim, Solingen, Magdeburg, Aschaffenburg and Munich
have all suffered grievous attacks. A Spanish tourist was stabbed at
the Holocaust memorial in the centre of Berlin on Friday night,
although his wounds are not considered life-threatening.

All the alleged attackers were immigrants, and the AfD under Alice
Weidel has advanced to about 20% in the polls with its nationalist,
anti-immigration message.

She has appealed to younger voters on social media, and is far ahead
in the race on TikTok, with 870,000 followers. She has also been
buoyed by support from both billionaire Elon Musk and US
Vice-President JD Vance, who has been accused of meddling in the
German campaign.

The AfD talks of securing Germany's borders and deporting migrants who
came illegally and committed crimes. But she uses the word
"remigration" which has also been linked to mass deportations.

In Solingen, where a Syrian was accused of stabbing to death three
people last August, hundreds of people turned out on Friday night to
speak out against the rise of the far right.

"We have a lot of friends who grew up in Germany whose parents did
not," said one woman called Natalie, 35. "We don't want anybody to
kick them out and we don't want our borders closed."

One man called Jochen held up a sign that read "Never Again is Now!"

There was a large police presence at the protest, and Friday night's
stabbing in Berlin which police say was motivated by antisemitism has
heightened security fears.

A police union spokesman has warned of a risk of attacks aimed at
destabilising democracy.

All the mainstream parties have ruled out working with the AfD in
government, but if it polls higher than 20% it could double its number
of seats to 150 in the 630-seat parliament.

Merz's most likely partner is Chancellor Olaf Scholz's Social
Democrats, although probably without Scholz himself. The message from
his centre-left SPD as the final day of campaigning began was that
every vote counts, and if Germans wanted a strong government they
needed a strong SPD.

The Social Democrats are languishing in third in the polls, but Scholz
is pinning his hopes on an estimated one in five undecided voters who
could make a big difference.

Friedrich Merz was in a relaxed and confident mood when he appeared on
stage this week in front of 1,200 supporters in the tech-hub city of
Darmstadt near Frankfurt. But his message was stark as he turned his
thoughts to Donald Trump's presidency.

One hand in his pocket and the other holding the microphone, he spoke
of unprecedented times and a "tectonic shift in the world's centres of
power".

"A political order is now crumbling. What we have become used to for
decades is breaking down." He was not even sure if the US would join
Germany in celebrating the 70th year of its accession to Nato in the
summer.

He castigated the outgoing government for failing to take a leading
role on the international stage.

"The German government and chancellor must finally take on a leading
role in Europe again. If I'm elected I will spend a significant part
of my time keeping this European Union together."

FIND OUT MORE ABOUT GERMANY'S ELECTIONS:

Who's who and what you need to know

Merz: Risk-taker who flirted with far right

Katya Adler: Far right looks for breakthrough as Germany falters

Tensions laid bare as Germans worry about immigration

Germans have had almost nightly opportunities to see their political
leaders thrash out the big issues in TV debates, and Alice Weidel has
been in the thick of them, sharing the stage with both Merz and
Scholz.

In the run-up to the vote she met Vice-President JD Vance, who
castigated German politicians for raising a "firewall" against the far
right and of ignoring "the will of the voters".

That firewall - _brandmauer_ in German - has held strong since the end
of the war, although Merz himself was accused of breaking it when he
relied on the support of the AfD last month in a motion on migration.

He has faced demonstrations ever since, and there was a noisy protest
when he visited Darmstadt.

PhD student Annika, 29, held a Herz statt Merz banner - love instead
of Merz. "He says he won't do something with the far-right AfD, but
his actions contradict what he says. I don't trust him at all."

Merz appears to have been stung by the outcry and has sought to
reassure voters there will be "no tolerance, no minority government
[with the AfD], nothing at all".
