FIVE THINGS TO LOOK FOR IN CANADA'S ELECTION

Canada's general election campaign is under way, a 36-day sprint
taking place in unprecedented circumstances.

Voters will consider which party should govern the country just as the
US - its neighbour and largest economic partner - launches a trade war
and President Donald Trump muses about making Canada the 51st US
state.

Domestic issues like housing and immigration will still be important,
of course, but for the first time in decades, Canadians will also be
grappling with fundamental questions about the country's future when
they head to the ballot box on 28 April.

Here are five things to watch as the campaign unfolds.

CANDIDATES TALKING TOUGH ON TRUMP

Canada and the US share deeply integrated economies, a long-standing
security partnership and the longest "undefended" border in the world.

So when President Donald Trump says he wants to use "economic force"
against America's neighbour, calls the border an "artificially drawn
line" and imposes steep tariffs, it marks a profound shift in the
relationship between the two allies.

"It is impossible to overstate the impact of the president's actions
on Canadian politics, on Canadian psyche, on Canadian business," said
Marci Surkes, chief strategy officer at public affairs firm Compass
Rose and a former policy director to ex-prime minister Justin Trudeau,
a Liberal.

Trump's interventions have already reshaped politics in Canada,
helping transform what seemed like a certain Conservative victory into
a too-close-to-call battle with the Liberals.

And on Sunday, as campaigning began, all the party leaders focused
their launch messages heavily on the US threats.

What the US president says and does over the next few weeks will
inevitably factor into the race. On April 2, for example, in just the
second week of campaigning, the White House is expected to announce
more global tariffs.

He has already started to make his views on the election known,
telling Fox News host Laura Ingraham on 18 March that Conservative
leader Pierre Poilievre is "stupidly, no friend of mine" and that it
may be "easier to deal actually with a Liberal".

Ultimately, he added, who wins "doesn't matter to me at all".

QUESTIONS ABOUT EXPERIENCE

Canadians know their next PM will have no choice but to deal with
Donald Trump.

So the question on many voters' minds is: who can most capably handle
the unpredictable US president?

The contest essentially boils down to the new Liberal leader Mark
Carney and Poilievre, who has led the Conservatives since 2022.

Two other major parties will be contesting seats in Parliament - the
left-leaning New Democrats (NDP) and the the Bloc Québécois - but
Canadians have historically elected Conservative or Liberal
governments.

Carney, 60, is a former central banker who is new to politics - after
taking over from Justin Trudeau earlier this month, he became the
first prime minister in Canada never elected to Parliament.

He brings experience on the world stage - he governed the Bank of
England from 2013-2020 - but lacks time spent in the cut and thrust of
political campaigning, and will get his first real test in this
general election.

If the Liberals fail to win the election, he could have the shortest
tenure of any PM in the country's history.

At 45, Poilievre may be significantly younger, but he is a political
veteran. First elected to the House of Commons at age 25, he has two
decades of experience in federal politics, including time in cabinet,
and is known for his political acumen.

As party leader, he was quick to highlight the pain that inflation was
inflicting on Canadian families, and capitalise on broader anger at
Trudeau and the Liberals on issues like immigration.

His tag line "Canada is broken" has in recent weeks become "Canada
first". The shift in message from a country in decline to one of
patriotism and strength comes as he presents himself as able to stand
up to Trump.

He is "the consummate retail politician", Ms Surkes said, but "suffers
from having - right now - a brand and a narrative that no longer fits
the moment".

SOVEREIGNTY PLAYING BIG

It will be the first time in decades that a Canadian election is not
focused mostly on domestic issues.

Instead, this election is about the big, national questions: Canada's
sovereignty and what the country must do to face an uncertain future
with uncertain allies.

Ms Surkes compared the situation to the 1988 elecftion, when Canada's
relationship with the US also took centre stage as the country mulled
joining the North American Free Trade Agreement.

"The same types of questions were being asked in terms of whether
there would be a forfeiture of Canadian sovereignty, economic
sovereignty, economic independence," she said.

This time, both main parties are pushing a vision of growth and
independence - building much-needed housing, moving forward on major
energy and resource projects, retaliating against US tariffs and
bolstering Canada's defence capabilities.

So where are the differences?

Carney has moved the Liberals more towards the political centre as he
seeks to distance himself from Trudeau, who left office deeply
unpopular.

He has promised to "spend less and invest more" and to boost capital
investments in things like housing, and military infrastructure and
computing resources.

Poilievre, a fiscal hawk, pitches cutting red tape and taxes to boost
industry and spur infrastructure investment and home building.

The Conservatives have also focused more sharply on issues like crime.

COST-OF-LIVING CONCERNS FIGHTING FOR SPACE

The core domestic concerns that Canadians have had in recent years -
affordability, housing, healthcare - haven't gone away.

But pollster David Coletto, CEO of Abacus Data, says they have been
subsumed by the "existential threat" of the trade war with the US.

"Even if the cost of living is still the top issue, it may not be as
powerful a motivator to drive voting behavior," he adds.

So the parties will be challenged to come up with convincing policies
to address these concerns - but frame them in the context of the wider
economic threat.

The US tariffs, the uncertainty caused by their on-again-off-again
nature, and Canada's C$60bn in counter-tariffs, are already being felt
by businesses and communities across the country.

This week, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
more than halved its economic growth outlook for Canada this year and
next.

MORE SHIFTS IN POLLING?

National opinion polls have seen a stunning reversal in recent weeks,
with the Conservatives losing the 20-point lead they had over the
Liberals for the better part of a year.

As the race officially begins, it's a toss-up.

Mr Coletto said three factors led to the "perfect storm" in polling:
the resignation of the deeply unpopular Trudeau, the Liberal
leadership race which that sparked, and the return of Donald Trump to
the White House.

Both candidates now are trying to "bring their enemies to the
battlefield" to eke out an advantage, he added. Carney is seeking to
paint Poilievre as "Trump-light", while Poilievre suggests Carney is
"just like Justin".

Each campaign enjoys natural advantages, he says.

The Conservatives have "an animated base who desperately want a change
in government", along with a well-funded political machine.

The Liberals currently "have the advantage on narrative" that has
helped shift the polls more in their favour.

The other two official parties - the NDP and the Bloc - have both seen
their popularity diminish.

The left-leaning NDP, which had 24 seats in the last Parliament,
helped prop up the Liberal minority government in recent years in
exchange for support for progressive policies like dental care for
low-income Canadians.

But leader Jagmeet Singh has been pushing hard against Carney, seeking
to frame him as someone who will "protect billionaires and big
business".

Bloc leader Blanchet said on Sunday he would fight for Quebec
companies and workers struggling under US tariffs, especially in the
aluminium industry.

_As Canada gears up for an election this year, the BBC wants to hear
from voters across the country. _Tell us here if you would like to be
part of our coverage_._
