US DROPS BOUNTIES ON KEY TALIBAN LEADERS

The US has removed millions of dollars in bounties from senior members
of the Haqqani militant network in Afghanistan, including one on its
leader Sirajuddin Haqqani who is also the Taliban government's
interior minister.

It is a significant move given that the Haqqani network is accused of
carrying out some of the most high-profile and deadly attacks in
Afghanistan during the US-led war in the country, including attacks on
the American and Indian embassies, and NATO forces.

Currently, the network is a key part of the Taliban government, which
has controlled Afghanistan since foreign troops withdrew from the
country in 2021, following a deal struck between the US and the
Taliban during President Trump's first term.

The move to lift the bounties comes weeks into President Trump's
second term, and just days after US officials met with the Taliban
government in Kabul to secure the release of an American tourist,
detained since 2022.

A US state department spokesperson confirmed to the BBC that "there is
no current reward" for Sirajuddin Haqqani, his brother Abdul Aziz
Haqqani and brother-in-law Yahya Haqqani, but they remain 'Specially
Designated Global Terrorists and the Haqqani Network remains
designated as a Foreign Terrorist Organization".

An FBI webpage, which on Monday showed a $10 million dollar bounty on
Sirajuddin Haqqani, has now been updated to remove the reward offer.

Taliban interior ministry spokesman Abdul Mateen Qani told the BBC
that the lifting of bounties "was a result of continued diplomatic
efforts" by his government. "It is a good step and this shows our new
interaction with the world and particularly with the United States.
They (the US delegation) told us they want to increase positive
interaction and confidence building between us," he added.

On Saturday, a US delegation including hostage envoy Adam Boehler and
former envoy to Afghanistan Zalmay Khalilzad met with the Taliban
government's foreign minister Amir Khan Muttaqi and other Taliban
officials in Kabul. Afterwards, US national George Glezmann, detained
in December 2022 while visiting Afghanistan as a tourist, was released
by the Taliban government.

It is unclear if lifting the bounties was a part of the negotiations.

Founded by Sirajuddin Haqqani's father, Jalaluddin Haqqani in the
1980s, the Haqqani network started out as a CIA-backed anti-Soviet
outfit operating in Afghanistan and Pakistan. But it grew into one of
the most feared anti-Western militant organisations in the region.

The group allied with the Taliban when they first took power in
Afghanistan in 1996. Jalaluddin Haqqani died of a prolonged illness in
2018.

Currently, Sirajuddin Haqqani is emerging as a power centre in
Afghanistan's Taliban government, as rifts between him and the
Taliban's supreme leader Mullah Hibatullah Akhundzada grow.

Members of the Taliban government have told the BBC that the issue of
women's education is a key point of disagreement between the two
sides.

The Haqqanis have sought to project themselves as more moderate,
galvanising support among people in the country who are frustrated by
the supreme leader's intransigence on women's education.

The dropping of bounties by the US government is evidence that its
stature is also growing externally, among parts of the international
community keen to engage with the Taliban.

_Additional reporting by Mahfouz Zubaide and Bernd Debusmann_
