THE LONG, SLOW ROAD TO A RUSSIA-UKRAINE CEASEFIRE

THE LONG, SLOW ROAD TO A CEASEFIRE, WITH NO GUARANTEE OF SUCCESS

After three days of talks in Saudi Arabia, at last some progress.

Two separate texts outlining agreements between the US and Russia, and
the US and Ukraine.

There were some differences but much was the same. All sides agreed
"to ensure safe navigation, eliminate the use of force, and prevent
the use of commercial vessels for military purposes in the Black Sea".

They also agreed "to develop measures for implementing... the
agreement to ban strikes against energy facilities of Russia and
Ukraine".

President Zelensky regretted there was no explicit ban on attacks on
civilian infrastructure but sounded broadly content.

He told reporters Ukraine would implement the Black Sea and energy
ceasefires immediately.

He also got a nod to his agenda with the US saying that it would
"remain committed to helping achieve the exchange of prisoners of war,
the release of civilian detainees, and the return of forcibly
transferred Ukrainian children".

But then came a third document, issued by the Kremlin, which muddied
the waters.

It imposed conditions that did not appear in the original agreement
between the US and Russia.

It said the Black Sea ceasefire would come into force only when
sanctions were lifted on Russian banks, insurers, companies, ports and
ships that would allow it to export more agriculture and fertiliser
goods.

In other words, they saw this deal not just as a revival of the old
Black Sea Grain Initiative they pulled out of in 2023, but also an
opportunity to roll back a significant number of economic sanctions.

However, doing this may take some time and thus delay any maritime
ceasefire.

It also may not entirely be in the gift of the US to make all the
changes Russia requested.

For example, any return to the SWIFT financial messaging system would
require EU approval.

The Kremlin also said the 30-day pause on energy strikes would be
back-dated to start on 18 March and could be suspended if one side
violated the deal.

In other words, what has been agreed is a fragile step towards some
diminution of the fighting in Ukraine but with no guarantee of success
amid an atmosphere of mutual distrust.

Even if today's agreement were to survive, it is still a long way from
the comprehensive countrywide ceasefire the US originally wanted.

It is often said that ceasefires are processes, not events. And that
is as true as ever for this agreement.

What matters is not the announcement of any ceasefire, but if and how
it is implemented. In other words, the proof of the pudding will be in
the eating.

Will both sides make this deal work and then live up to it? Because in
the answer to those questions we will learn much about what both sides
really want.

Do they want a ceasefire to turn into a longer-term peace? Or do they
just want to trade while pressing home their advantage on the
battlefield?
