TURKEY PROTESTS: WHY THOUSANDS ARE PROTESTING IMAMOGLU'S ARREST

WHY ARE THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE PROTESTING IN TURKEY?

Tens of thousands of people across Turkey have been protesting the
arrest of Istanbul mayor Ekrem Imamoglu - the main political rival of
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

Protesters have been fired upon with tear gas and rubber bullets in
what has become the worst unrest in the country for more than a
decade.

WHAT SPARKED THE PROTESTS?

Demonstrations began in Istanbul on 19 March, sparked by the arrest of
leading opposition politician Ekrem Imamoglu earlier the same day.

It came days before Imamoglu was due to be elected as presidential
candidate for the secular Republican People's Party (CHP). He was
confirmed as the party's candidate for the 2028 election from his
prison cell on Sunday, following a symbolic vote.

Prosecutors accuse Imamoglu of corruption, which he denies. More than
100 people have also been detained as part of the investigation.

He was formally arrested on Sunday and charged with "establishing and
managing a criminal organisation, taking bribes, extortion, unlawfully
recording personal data and rigging a tender". He has also been
suspended from his post as mayor of Istanbul.

His CHP party said the arrest represented a "coup against our next
president" and called for supporters to take to the streets in
protest.

Students demonstrated at multiple universities in Istanbul, chanting
"We are not scared, we won't be silenced, we will not obey" - a common
opposition slogan in Turkey.

Protests started off relatively small in scale for a city with more
than 16 million people.

But they have since spread to dozens of other cities across Turkey and
are now on a level not seen for more than a decade.

Demonstrations have been largely peaceful, though there have been
clashes with police using water cannons and tear gas.

There has been a major nationwide crackdown in recent months with
authorities targeting opposition politicians, journalists and figures
in the entertainment industry.

Some protesters say the demonstrations also represent wider concerns
over Turkey's shift toward autocracy, as well as the economy and
healthcare.

WHO IS PROTESTING?

Many of those protesting Imamoglu's arrest are university students.

Students from different universities gathered in front of Istanbul
University near the Beyazit area on Wednesday, breaking through a
police barricade and moving towards Sarchane, where the Istanbul
Metropolitan Municipality building is located.

Protests on Thursday were also held on multiple university campuses in
Istanbul before spreading to the streets.

More than 1,100 people have been detained since demonstrations began,
according to Turkey's interior minister.

At least 10 journalists covering the protests have also been detained
in Istanbul and Izmir during dawn raids by police.

The CHP continued its vote for the party's presidential candidate on
Sunday with supporters heading to the ballot box in a symbolic vote
for Imamoglu despite his arrest.

Speaking to AFP near Istanbul's city hall, 29-year-old voter Ferhat
said: "Whenever there's a strong opponent [to Erdogan], they are
always jailed.

"There is a dictatorship in Turkey right now, nothing else. It's
politics in name only."

Meanwhile, Sukru Ilker, 70, said protesters did not want to "confront
the police" but to protect the candidate the city had voted for.

Ayten Oktay, a 63-year-old pharmacist, said Turkey had "woken up",
adding: "We will defend our rights until the end."

HOW HAS THE TURKISH GOVERNMENT RESPONDED?

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has condemned the protests, saying his
government would not "surrender" to "vandalism" or "street terror".

"We will not accept the disruption of public order," he has said.

Turkish authorities have banned public gatherings, but this has not
deterred protesters.

Erdogan and his administration have also denied claims Imamoglu's
arrest was politically motivated, insisting that Turkey's judiciary is
independent.

Turkey's president says the CHP has not been able to respond to the
corruption allegations and accused its party chairman, Özgür Özel,
of sowing unrest on the streets.

The European Commission urged Turkey on Monday to "uphold democratic
values" as a country that is both a member of the Council of Europe
and a candidate for joining the EU.

HOW LONG HAS ERDOGAN BEEN IN POWER?

Erdogan has held office for the past 22 years, as both prime minister
and president of Turkey for the Islamist-rooted Justice and
Development Party (AKP) he founded.

Due to term limits, he cannot run for office again in 2028 unless he
changes the constitution.

He and his AKP government survived an attempted coup in 2016 which saw
clashes on the streets of Istanbul and Ankara, leaving 256 people
dead.

To his supporters, Erdogan has brought Turkey years of economic
growth, but to his critics he is an autocratic leader intolerant of
dissent who harshly silences anyone who opposes him.

WHAT IS THE LATEST TRAVEL ADVICE FOR TURKEY?

The UK Foreign Office has not updated its advice for travelling to
Turkey since the current demonstrations.

But its advice page does note that demonstrations in cities can become
violent, with police known to have used water cannon and tear gas to
disperse crowds.

It advises to avoid all demonstrations and leave the area if one
develops.

The Foreign Office advises against all travel to within 10km (6 miles)
of the border with Syria due to fighting and a heightened risk of
terrorism.

Further advice on travel to Turkey can be found here.

You can get in touch by following this link
