HOW DOES CANADA'S GENERAL ELECTION WORK? A SIMPLE GUIDE

A SIMPLE GUIDE TO CANADA'S FEDERAL ELECTION

Mark Carney, former two-time central banker, was sworn in as Canada's
new prime minister earlier this month, after being elected leader of
the Liberal Party of Canada.

On Sunday, he called a snap election.

Several political leaders had called for a vote after former Prime
Minister Justin Trudeau announced he was resigning as leader of the
Liberals in January.

But after US President Donald Trump imposed steep tariffs on the
country, sparking a trade war, calls have grown for Canada to go to
the polls as soon as possible.

WHEN IS THE NEXT CANADIAN FEDERAL ELECTION?

With the snap election call, Carney is sending Canadians the polls in
a matter of weeks.

The election will be held on Monday 28 April.

By law, the maximum time between federal elections in Canada is five
years. The next vote was officially scheduled for 20 October 2025.

However, there are a couple of scenarios in which an early election
can be triggered:

The first scenario is what Carney did on Sunday.

WHO COULD BE PRIME MINISTER? 

In the Canadian federal election - as in the UK's general election -
voters do not cast a ballot directly for a prime minister.

Instead, the leader of the party with the majority of members of
parliament (MPs) becomes PM.

That means Carney will be in the running, along with Pierre Poilievre,
who leads the opposition Conservative Party, and Jagmeet Singh, the
leader of the New Democratic Party.

WHICH PARTIES WILL RUN CANDIDATES IN THE ELECTION?

Four main parties will contest the next election - the Liberals, the
Conservatives, the New Democrats (NDP) and the Bloc Quebecois.

The Liberal Party has been in power since 2015, when Trudeau was voted
in. At dissolution, it held 153 seats.

The Conservatives were the official opposition with 120 seats.

The Bloc Quebecois, which only runs candidates in the province of
Quebec, had 33 seats, and the NDP had 24.

The Green Party held two seats.

During the latter stages of Trudeau's premiership, opinion polls
consistently showed the Conservatives with a strong lead.

But the numbers tightened after Trudeau stepped down.

Following Trump's decision to introduce steep tariffs against Canada,
they tightened further, suggesting a neck-and-neck race.

WHAT DO THE POLLS SAY? 

When Trudeau resigned at the beginning of 2025, he did so under
significant pressure from his own party. It was felt that his personal
unpopularity was damaging the Liberals' hopes of winning the next
election.

National polling averages, shared by the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation (CBC), suggest how support for the Liberals weakened
throughout 2023 and 2024.

At the same time, support for the Conservatives soared. On 20 January
2025 - the day of Trump's inauguration - the Conservatives were
polling 44.8% while the Liberals were on 21.9%.

Since then, polls suggest that support for the Liberals has ticked
back up. The latest averages indicate that 37.5% of Canadians back the
Liberals, while 37.1% support the Conservatives.

This marks the first time in three years the Liberals are leading in
the polls, according to the CBC.

How to respond to President Trump's economic threats has overtaken the
cost of living as the dominant issue for voters.

HOW DOES THE CANADIAN FEDERAL ELECTION WORK?

There are 343 federal ridings - also called constituencies or
electoral districts -across the country. Each has a corresponding seat
in the House of Commons.

All the seats in the lower chamber, the House of Commons, are up for
grabs during an election.

Members of the Senate, the upper chamber, are appointed and do not run
for election.

Like the UK, Canada has a "first-past-the-post" electoral system.

The candidate who gets the most votes in each riding wins that seat
and become an MP. They do not need to get the majority of all the
votes cast in their area. Other parties win nothing in that area.

The leader of the party with the largest number of elected MPs
normally forms the government. The second-placed party usually forms
the official opposition.

If no party ends up with an overall majority of seats, the result is
known as a hung parliament or a minority government.

Practically, it means the party with the most seats will not be able
to pass legislation without the help of other parties.

WHO CAN VOTE IN THE CANADIAN FEDERAL ELECTION?

To vote in a Canadian election you must:
