PUTIN GIVES TRUMP BARE MINIMUM ON UKRAINE BUT THE WAR GOES ON

In the run up to today's call, Donald Trump made a big deal of his
conversation with Russia's Vladimir Putin.

But the results look like there's little to shout about.

The Russian president has given the US leader just enough to claim
that he made progress towards peace in Ukraine, without making it look
like he was played by the Kremlin.

Trump can point to Putin's pledge to halt attacks on Ukraine's energy
infrastructure for 30 days. If that actually happens, it will bring
some relief to civilians.

But it's nowhere near the full and unconditional ceasefire that the US
wanted from Russia.

The "very horrible war" Trump has insisted he can stop is still
raging.

And Putin, a man indicted as a suspected war criminal by the ICC, has
been given a leg-up back to the top tier of global politics.

Russian state media report that the two presidents' phone call lasted
more than two hours. The Kremlin readout – its account of the call
– is also long at 500 words.

It presents the conversation as chatty: they apparently discussed ice
hockey, the kind of detail an audience back in Russia will lap up.

After three years as a pariah in the western world, and frosty
relations long before that, Russia is back dealing directly with a US
administration that wants to engage.

The two leaders are even discussing Middle East peace and "global
security".

The Kremlin must be struggling to believe the transformation.

Ahead of the call, some wondered whether Donald Trump might actually
pile some pressure on Russia. After all, it's been clear for over a
week that it was stalling on the ceasefire.

But there's no sign of a dressing down for Putin like the one
Ukraine's leader Volodymyr Zelensky had to endure in the Oval Office a
fortnight ago.

Both countries' accounts suggest nothing has changed.

Russia repeats that it wants peace. But instead of grounding its
drones and silencing its guns, it's quibbling over how a still
non-existent ceasefire might be monitored.

Meanwhile, it's adding even more conditions aimed at crippling Kyiv's
ability to resist.

One demand is that the flow of both weapons and intelligence to
Ukraine from its allies has to cease.

For Ukrainians, the only sliver of hope is that the US hasn't agreed
to any of this – yet.

They can also point to the call as more proof that Russia has no
interest in ending its invasion.

But all that talking will bring Ukraine minimal relief from its
suffering.

For US diplomacy, too, it has to be disappointing.

But for the Kremlin it will feel like a pretty decent day, the kind
unimaginable before Donald Trump returned to the White House.
