WHO'S WHO IN CANADA'S FEDERAL ELECTION

Prime Minister and Liberal leader Mark Carney has called an election
in Canada, kickstarting five weeks of campaigning before Canadians
head to the polls.

Voting day will officially be on Monday 28 April.

It will be the first election in a decade without former Prime
Minister Justin Trudeau on the ballot, and the two major parties in
Canada - the Conservatives and the Liberals - are neck-and-neck in the
polls, making it a race to watch.

While Canadians don't vote for prime minister directly, the leader of
the party that wins the most seats will traditionally become head of
government.

Here is a breakdown of the leaders of Canada's major parties.

LIBERAL PARTY LEADER MARK CARNEY

Carney, 60, is the incumbent prime minister of Canada, but he has only
been on the job for a few days.

His party overwhelmingly chose him - with more than 85% of the vote -
to succeed Justin Trudeau as Liberal leader earlier this month. He
became prime minister shortly after, following Trudeau's resignation.

For many in Canada and the UK, Carney is a familiar face. He was head
of both the Banks of Canada and England, serving at the former during
the 2008 financial crash and the latter during Brexit.

He was born in Fort Smith, Northwest Territories, making him the first
Canadian prime minister from the north. Carney later grew up in
Edmonton, Alberta, before he attended Harvard University and then
Oxford, where he studied economics.

Carney is hailed for his financial expertise. He has also taken a
defiant stance against US President Donald Trump, vowing retaliation
against his tariffs and stating that Canada will never become the 51st
US state.

But Carney is politically untested. He has never been elected to
public office in Canada, and this general election will be his very
first. His French is also weak, which could be a liability among
voters who feel strongly about preserving Canada's French-speaking
heritage, especially in the province of Quebec.

Recent polls show his party is slightly trailing behind the
Conservatives, but more Canadians say they think Carney would be a
better prime minister than his opponent Pierre Poilievre.

CONSERVATIVE LEADER PIERRE POILIEVRE

Poilievre, 45, originally hails from Calgary, Alberta. He has been in
Canadian politics for nearly two decades - first elected to the House
of Commons at age 25, making him one of the youngest MPs at the time.

Since then, he has consistently advocated for a low-tax, small
government in Canada.

He is known for his confrontational style of politics. In recent
years, Poilievre has tirelessly attacked the Liberals and Trudeau,
saying that their "disastrous" and "woke" policies have worsened the
quality of life in Canada, while promising a return to "common sense
politics" if his party were to form government.

It is a message that has resonated with many Canadians who have been
worried about the country's housing crisis, stagnant wages and high
cost of living. Poilievre has led in national polls since mid-2023,
and analysts had projected a near-certain win for his party in the
upcoming election.

But the Liberal Party has since caught up to him in the polls,
following Trudeau's resignation and the rise of Carney as Liberal
leader.

Poilievre has been criticised for his populist style of politics and
has drawn comparisons to Trump at a time when Canadians have rejected
the US President's tariffs and his rhetoric that Canada should become
the "51st state".

Poilievre has sought to shift his messaging since, distancing himself
from Trump and vowing to put "Canada first."

Trump himself has said that Poilievre is not "MAGA enough", though the
Conservative leader has been praised by Trump ally and tech titan Elon
Musk.

BLOC QUÉBÉCOIS LEADER YVES-FRANÇOIS BLANCHET

The Bloc Québécois is a Quebec nationalist party that only runs
candidates in the French-speaking province, meaning its leader is
unlikely to become Canada's next prime minister.

Still, they are a key player in Canadian elections, and their
popularity in Quebec could determine the fate of the other major
parties looking to form government.

Blanchet has led the party since 2019. He is known for his frankness,
calling Trump's 51st state rhetoric nonsense.

"It's enough jibber-jabber," Blanchet said during an address on
Trump's tariffs earlier this month in Montreal. "We can say whatever
we want, but that doesn't mean we can do whatever we want."

He has also dismissed Trump's tariffs, saying: "I'm sure there will be
somebody on his plane between a basketball game and a baseball game to
tell him, don't do that, because it's bad for us. I'm sure that at the
end of the day, the voice of reason will prevail."

On domestic issues, Blanchet has pushed for Quebec to diversify its
trade partners, and has asked for a prominent seat at Canada's
economic planning table, noting that his province is home to the
largest aluminium sector in the country - a commodity that has been
targeted by US tariffs.

Blanchet has also suggested that the appetite for an independent
Quebec will "come roaring back" when and if the US-Canada relationship
stabilises.

Polling shows the Bloc - who are going into the election with 33 seats
in Parliament - have been trailing behind the Liberal Party in Quebec.

NEW DEMOCRATIC PARTY LEADER JAGMEET SINGH

Singh, 46, is leader of the NDP, a left-leaning party that
traditionally focuses on worker and labour issues. He made history in
2017 when he became the first ethnic minority and practising Sikh to
lead a major political party in Canada.

In 2019, the former criminal defence lawyer was elected as an MP in a
British Columbia riding, where he has served in public office since.

The NDP had helped the Trudeau Liberal government keep its hold on
power since 2021, providing needed votes in Parliament in exchange for
support on progressive legislation like dental benefits for
lower-income families and a national pharmacare programme covering
birth control and insulin.

But in late 2024, Singh tore up that "supply and confidence"
agreement, after Trudeau's cabinet directed its industrial relations
board to impose binding arbitration to end a work stoppage at Canada's
two largest railways.

At the time, Singh had said that the Liberals "let people down" and
didn't "deserve another chance from Canadians".

But his party has struggled to shore up support. Polls show that only
9% of Canadians intend to vote for them as of mid-March, with their
ground shrinking while support for the Liberals has risen.

A big question will be whether the NDP will be able to grow the number
of seats they occupy in the House of Commons and maintain official
party status.

In the early 2010s, the party had enough support to form the official
opposition, meaning it was the party with the second-most seats in
Parliament. By 2021, their seat number had shrunk to 24 out of 338.

_As Canada gears up for an election this year, the BBC wants to hear
from voters across the country. _Tell us here if you would like to be
part of our coverage_._
