JAPAN COURT ORDERS CONTROVERSIAL 'MOONIES' CHURCH TO DISBAND

JAPAN COURT DISSOLVES CONTROVERSIAL 'MOONIES' CHURCH

A court in Japan has ordered the disbandment of the controversial
Unification Church, which came under scrutiny after the shock killing
of former prime minister Shinzo Abe in 2022.

The alleged assassin had confessed that he held a grievance against
Abe because of the ex-leader's ties with the church - he blamed the
church for bankrupting his family.

Japan's education and culture ministry sought the church's dissolution
and accused it of manipulating followers into making huge donations
and other financial sacrifices.

But the church, more popularly known as the "Moonies", argued that the
donations were part of legitimate religious activities. It can appeal
to overturn Tuesday's ruling.

The order handed down by a Tokyo district court will strip the church
of its tax-exempt status and require it to liquidate its assets, but
it will still be allowed to operate in Japan.

During their investigation, authorities found that the church coerced
followers into buying expensive items by exploiting fears about their
spiritual well-being.

They interviewed nearly 200 people who said they were victimised by
the church.

The Unification Church, which was started in South Korea, has
established a presence in Japan since the 1960s. The name "Moonies"
was derived from the name of its founder, Sun Myung Moon.

It has drawn controversy even before Abe's assassination for teaching
that marriage is central to spiritual salvation. It is known for
holding mass wedding ceremonies involving thousands of couples.

Since 2023, some 200 former believers who said they were forced to
donate to the group have demanded compensations amounting to 5.7
billion yen ($38.5m) in total, according their lawyers.

Investigations following Abe's assassination revealed close ties
between the secretive sect and many conservative ruling-party
lawmakers, leading to the resignation of four ministers.

An internal investigation by former prime minister Fumio Kishida's
Liberal Democratic Party found that 179 of its 379 lawmakers had
interacted with the Unification Church.

The relationships ranged from attending church events to accepting
donations and receiving election support.

The revelations about the extent and level of involvement of the
controversial church and the LDP shocked the nation.
