UKRAINE'S 'CHAOTIC' WITHDRAWAL FROM RUSSIA, IN ITS SOLDIERS' WORDS

Until just over a week ago, Artem Kariakin and his unit were making
regular trips across Ukraine's border into the Russian town of Sudzha.

He shows me video taken with a phone of their very last trip, as
Ukrainian forces retreated from Russia's Kursk region. It shows them
making their way past dozens of burnt out military and civilian
vehicles.

A soldier armed with a shotgun, their last line of defence, scans the
horizon for Russian drones. Out of nowhere, one flies towards the back
of their truck. Sparks fly, but they keep on going.

Artem says they were lucky - the explosive charge was not big enough
to stop them.

Another truck nearby was less fortunate. It was already in flames.

Artem admits Ukraine's retreat from Sudzha, the largest town Ukraine
held in Kursk, was "not well organised".

"It was pretty chaotic," he tells me. "Many units left in disarray. I
think the problem was the order to withdraw came too late."

It wasn't helped, he says, because units were operating without proper
communications. The Starlink satellite systems they normally rely on
didn't work inside Russia.

The 27-year-old soldier still views the Kursk offensive as broadly
successful. Artem says it forced Russia to divert its forces from the
east. Most of Ukraine's troops still managed to escape in time –
even if for many it was on foot.

But he believes Ukraine's surprise incursion into Russian territory,
launched last August, was too deep and too narrow - relying on just
one main road for supplies and reinforcements.

While Artem and his men were fleeing for their lives, US President
Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin were talking by
phone about trying to bring the war to an end. Artem says he finds
that "absurd".

"To me these calls between Trump and Putin are just surreal," he says.
"Trump wants to end the war because he promised to do it - and Putin
wants to deceive Trump to continue his war. I can't take their
conversations seriously."

Artem, whose home is in the now Russian-occupied Luhansk region, tells
me he feels disappointed with the US and Trump. "What can I feel when
they just want to give away my home?"

Artem says he never believed that Putin would be willing to trade any
part of Russia for Ukraine's occupied territories. But he still
believes the Kursk offensive was important to protect its own border.
Ukrainian troops may have been forced to retreat, but they still
occupy high ground just over the border with Sumy.

Ukraine is continuing its cross-border raids – not just into Kursk,
but Belgorod too.

Serhiy's assault battalion helps plan these attacks – finding a way
through Russian minefields and anti-tank obstacles known as "dragon's
teeth".

We joined him on a night-time mission to locate and recover armoured
vehicles in need of repairs. It's the safest time to move close to the
Russian border.

Serhiy himself is no stranger to Russia: he was born there. He now has
Belorussian citizenship, but he chose to fight for Ukraine. He
justifies Ukraine's incursions into his former home. Russia too, he
says, has been trying to create a buffer zone inside Ukrainian
territory.

Travelling in his Ukrainian-made armoured vehicle, Serhiy still lists
the likely threats, now we are less than 10km from the Russian border:
glide bombs, rockets and artillery, and drones fitted with thermal
imaging cameras.

His own vehicle is fitted with electronic counter-measures to jam
enemy drones, but even those won't work against drones operated via
fibre optic wires. Those can't be stopped, though on some routes
Ukraine has now erected netting to try to catch the drones before they
can hit their target.

Our original search near the Russian border for a damaged US-made
Bradley armoured vehicle is abandoned when Serhiy receives
intelligence that Russian drones are operating nearby. Instead, he
tries to locate another broken-down Bradley where the risks will be
smaller.

He and his driver still have to overcome obstacles along the way.
Trees and branches lie strewn across their path – remnants from a
recent Russian air strike. We see several more explosions in the
distance, briefly turning the night sky orange.

Serhiy eventually finds his broken-down Bradley. It's already been
retrieved from the battlefield across the border and has been loaded
onto a lorry to be taken back for repairs.

The Bradley commander confirms to me that they've been fighting in
Russia. He describes the situations across the border as "difficult,
but we're holding on".

The Bradley is another reminder of Ukraine's reliance on US military
support. That now seems less certain with Trump's focus on peace
talks. Serhiy says it's already clear to him that there's "haggling
behind Ukraine's back".

I ask Serhiy if he thinks European nations can fill any void left by
the US. Is a European "coalition of the willing" enough to guarantee
Ukraine's security?

"I think if America doesn't help Ukraine, then a ceasefire will be
agreed soon - but on extremely unfavourable terms for Ukraine," Serhiy
replies.

"Europe clearly cannot resolve this conflict alone. They're not strong
enough. They've been focussing on their own economies instead of
thinking about security."

Serhiy says he wants the war to end. Like many Ukrainians, he would
like to see peace - but not at any price.

_Additional reporting by Volodymyr Lozkho and Anastasiia Levchenko_
