TRUMP REVOKES SECURITY CLEARANCE FOR KAMALA HARRIS, HILLARY CLINTON
AND OTHERS

TRUMP REVOKES SECURITY CLEARANCE FOR HARRIS, CLINTON, AND CRITICS

US President Donald Trump revoked security clearances from his
previously defeated Democratic election rivals, Kamala Harris and
Hillary Clinton, as well as a number of other former officials and
critics.

Trump said in February he was revoking security clearance for his
predecessor Joe Biden. His order confirmed that decision, adding that
he was also revoking the security clearance of "any other member" of
the Biden family.

"I have determined that it is no longer in the national interest for
the following individuals to access classified information," Trump's
memorandum read.

Former US presidents and top security officials usually keep their
security clearance as a courtesy.

Trump ordered department and agency leaders to "revoke unescorted
access to secure United States government facilities for these
individuals."

"This action includes, but is not limited to, receipt of classified
briefings, such as the President's Daily Brief, and access to
classified information held by any member of the intelligence
community by virtue of the named individuals' previous tenure in the
Congress," the order stated.

For several named figures, the loss of access to classified material
and spaces will have a more symbolic impact.

It may limit the materials they are able to review, or restrict access
to some government buildings or secure facilities.

The lawyers and prosecutors named by Trump, however, could potentially
face roadblocks in accessing or reviewing information for their cases
or clients.

Trump's revocations focus on top Biden administration officials, as
well as prominent political critics and attorneys who have challenged
Trump or his allies in court.

Biden's secretary of state Antony Blinken, national security advisor
Jake Sullivan, and deputy attorney general Lisa Monaco all lost their
clearances.

Trump also targeted two of his own former officials from his first
term: Fiona Hill and Alexander Vindman, who testified during his first
impeachment trial that began in 2019.

Trump also revoked access for high-profile Republican critics, former
Representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger.

They were the only two Republican lawmakers who joined a US House
investigation into Trump's role in the 6 January 2021 attack on
Congress.

Both also voted to charge Trump in his second impeachment, which a
Democratic-led US House of Representatives instigated after the riot.
Trump was acquitted by the Senate on the charge of inciting the 6
January riot.

Trump has also singled out top legal opponents in his latest decision
on security access. His order revoked clearance for New York attorney
general Letitia James, who brought multiple lawsuits against Trump and
his businesses.

In a civil fraud lawsuit that concluded in 2024, a judge found Trump
liable for hundreds of millions of dollars in fines. Trump is
appealing the decision.

Manhattan district attorney Alvin Bragg, who prosecuted and won
Trump's criminal hush money case last year, also lost his clearance.

Trump's legal targets went beyond elected prosecutors. He withdrew
security clearance for Norm Eisen, an attorney leading multiple
lawsuits against the Trump administration's efforts to reduce the
federal workforce.

Andrew Weissmann, a former federal prosecutor who joined an
investigation of Trump during his first term and later provided media
commentary about the hush money trial, also lost his clearance.

Previous media reports had indicated that the administration had
pulled the security clearance for a top whistleblower attorney in
Washington, Mark Zaid.

Friday's order listed him among the individuals who would lose access.

However, Mr Zaid told the BBC that "despite being told three times
that my clearance has been revoked, I still have not received anything
formally."

He claimed losing his security clearance would harm "the federal
employees, including Trump supporters, who count on me to handle cases
few other lawyers could."

Several of the individuals chosen by Trump derided his order in social
media statements.

"I don't care what noises Donald Trump makes about a security
clearance that hasn't been active for five years," Mr Vindman wrote on
X.

Mr Eisen wrote on X that being targeted by Trump's order "just makes
me file even more lawsuits!"

Trump had earlier pulled security clearances of more than four dozen
former intelligence officials whom he accused of meddling in the 2020
election in Joe Biden's favour. He provided no evidence for these
claims.

In February, Trump announced he was revoking Biden's security access.
In a social media post, Trump said Biden "set this precedent in 2021,
when he instructed the Intelligence Community (IC) to stop the 45th
President of the United States (ME!) from accessing details on
National Security, a courtesy provided to former Presidents".

In 2021, Biden - serving as president at the time - barred his
defeated rival Trump from having access to intelligence briefings
citing his "erratic behaviour".

A 2024 Justice Department special counsel report found Biden had
improperly retained classified documents from his time as vice
president. The report noted that Biden had cooperated with federal
investigators and returned the discovered documents.

In 2023, Justice Department special prosecutor Jack Smith indicted
Trump for allegedly mishandling classified documents following his
first term in office and obstructing their return to the government.

Trump pleaded not guilty and a Florida federal judge dismissed the
case in July 2024. Smith officially dropped the case that December
after Trump won re-election.
