GERMANY SET TO VOTE ON HISTORIC INCREASE IN DEFENCE SPENDING

What happens today, here in Berlin, will impact the entire future of
Europe's defence and its ongoing support for Ukraine.

Germany's Parliament, the Bundestag, is voting on whether to take the
brakes off defence spending. This could pave the way for a massive
uplift in military investment just as Russia makes gains in Ukraine
and Washington signals that Europe can no longer rely on US
protection.

"This vote in the Bundestag is absolutely crucial," says Prof Monika
Schnitzer, who chairs Germany's Council of Economic Experts.

"After the Munich Security Conference, then the Trump-Zelensky row,
Europe got a wake-up call. For the first time Europeans may not be
able to rely on Washington. A lot of people had sleepless nights after
that."

"The outlook for European defence spending hinges on developments in
Germany, as the holder of the region's largest defence budget," agrees
Dr Fenella McGerty, senior fellow for defence economics at the
London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies.

Defence spending in Germany rose by 23.2% last year, helping to drive
a record 11.7% rise in European defence outlay.

"The remarkable initiatives announced in Germany are key to enabling
further growth," adds Dr McGerty.

"Without them, any progress made on strengthening Germany's military
capability may have stalled."

Germany's incoming new Chancellor, Friedrich Merz, is in a race
against time.

The new parliament convenes on 25 March and not everyone is in favour
of all this money being spent, especially on defence.

Both the far-right AfD party and the far-left Linke have vowed to
oppose it. The vote needs two-thirds in favour to go through, so Merz
has a better chance of this happening today, under the existing (old)
parliament. It then needs to be approved by Germany's upper house.

Meanwhile Europe is still coming to terms with the shock of
announcements coming from the Trump administration.

At last month's Munich Security Conference I watched as delegates sat
open-mouthed listening to US Vice-President JD Vance's blistering
attack on Europe's policies on migration and free speech.

This was preceded days earlier by US Defence Secretary Pete Hegseth
telling Nato members that America's 80-year-long defensive umbrella
for Europe should no longer be taken for granted.

Defence strategists in Europe are already planning for the
unthinkable: a semi-victorious Russia making gains in Ukraine, then
rebuilding its army and threatening Nato's eastern members, such as
the Baltic states, within three years or less.

This, at a time when the US commitment to Europe's defence is looking
extremely shaky. President Trump is being urged by some in his circle
to pull US troops out of Europe and even to withdraw from Nato
altogether.

HISTORICAL CAUTION

There is talk of France extending its national nuclear deterrent to
cover other European nations.

Meanwhile, most European governments are under pressure to raise
defence spending after years of cuts.

The British Army has now shrunk to its smallest size since the
Napoleonic Wars, over 200 years ago, and experts predict it would run
out of ammunition within two weeks of fighting a full-scale
conventional war in Europe.

Germany has long been cautious about defence spending, not just for
historical reasons dating back to 1945, but also due to the global
debt crisis of 2009.

Which brings us back to today's crucial vote in the Bundestag. It is
not just about defence. One part is about freeing up €500bn
(£420bn) for German infrastructure – fixing things like bridges and
roads, but also to pay for climate change measures, something the
Green Party insisted on.

The other part is about removing the restrictions in the constitution
on borrowing that could, in theory, free up unlimited billions of
euros for defence spending, both for Germany's armed forces and for a
pan-European defence fund. On 4 March European Commission President
Ursula Von der Leyen announced plans for an €800bn defence fund
called The ReArm Europe Fund.

The proposal being voted on in Berlin is that any spending on defence
that amounts to more than 1% of Germany's GDP (national wealth) would
no longer be subject to a limit on borrowing. Until now this debt
ceiling has been fixed at 0.35 pct of GDP.

Other countries will be watching closely to see if this proposal
passes. If it does not, then the EU Commission's 'ReArm Europe'
project could be off to a shaky start.

The challenge today for Europe's security is a stark one. If the US no
longer has its back, or at the very least cannot be relied upon to
come to Europe's defence, then what does the continent need to do to
fill the gap?

Let's start with the numbers. According to the Kiel Institute, which
meticulously tracks these things, Europe spends just 0.1% of its
wealth on helping to defend Ukraine, while the US has been spending
0.15%.

"That means," says the Kiel Institute's Giuseppe Irto, "that if Europe
is to make up the shortfall then it needs to double its contribution
to 0.21%."

But regardless of what happens today in Berlin this is not just about
money.

Many of the most sought-after weapons in Ukraine's armoury have come
from the US, like Patriot air defence and long-range artillery systems
like Himars. The Kiel Institute puts the proportion of Ukraine's
rocket artillery at 86% coming from the US, with 82% of its howitzer
ammunition also being US-sourced.

Then there is the whole question of US intelligence aid for Kyiv, much
of it derived from satellites and geospatial imagery. If Washington
were to permanently switch that off, then Ukrainian forces risk being
partially blinded.

If America's nuclear arsenal is taken out of the equation then there
is a massive disparity between Russia's 5,000-plus warheads and the
combined total of Britain and France's nukes which amount to less than
a tenth of that. But that still theoretically leaves enough to act as
a nuclear deterrent.

CULTURE SHIFT

When it comes to "conventional", ie. non-nuclear arms, Western defence
chiefs are fond of saying that Nato's combined forces are superior to
Russia's.

Maybe, but if there is one glaring lesson to come out of the Ukraine
war it is that "mass" matters. Russia's army may be of poor quality
but President Putin has been able to throw such huge numbers of men,
drones, shells and missiles at Ukraine's front lines that the Russians
are inexorably advancing, albeit slowly and at huge cost.

This should not come as a surprise. Moscow put its economy on to a war
footing some time ago. It appointed an economist as its defence
minister and retooled many of its factories to churn out vast
quantities of munitions, especially explosive-tipped drones.

While many European nations have dragged their feet over raising
defence spending much above the Nato-mandated 2% of GDP, Russia's is
closer to 7%. Around 40% of Russia's national budget is spent on
defence.

So Europe has a fair bit of catching up to do if it is to even come
close to shoring up its defence and security.

"If the vote passes then it will be significant for Germany and for
Europe," says Ed Arnold, senior research fellow for European security
at the Royal United Services Institute think tank.

"It will set a precedent and allow others to follow... However, three
years on from the invasion of Ukraine the case of Germany is a
reminder that more money for defence is necessary but not sufficient.

"Europe needs defence and security leaders who are able to navigate a
rapidly deteriorating Euro-Atlantic security environment. Cultural,
rather than financial reform, would be most valuable to Europe right
now."
