ISRAELI AIR STRIKE KILLS TOP HAMAS OFFICIAL IN GAZA

An Israeli air strike on the southern city of Khan Younis in Gaza has
killed top Hamas political leader Salah al-Bardaweel, a Hamas official
has told the BBC.

Locals say the air strike killed both Bardaweel, regarded as Hamas's
highest-ranking political leader, and his wife. Israeli officials had
no immediate comment.

The total death toll in Gaza since the war began surpassed 50,000 on
Sunday, its Hamas-run health authorities said, with least 30 people
killed in Khan Yunis and Rafah so far on Sunday.

Israel resumed heavy strikes on Gaza earlier this week - in effect
ending the first phase of a ceasefire that lasted almost two months.
It blamed Hamas for rejecting a new US proposal to extend the truce.

Hamas, in turn, accused Israel of abandoning the original deal -
mediated by Qatar, Egypt and the US. It envisaged the withdrawal of
Israeli troops and the subsequent release of Israeli hostages and
Palestinian prisoners - in addition to negotiations to end the war
entirely and reconstruct Gaza.

In a statement on Sunday, Hamas said Bardaweel, 66, had been praying
along with his wife when an Israeli missile struck their tent.

A father of eight, Bardaweel was one of Hamas's most prominent
political figures.

Born in Khan Younis refugee camp, he was known to be close to Hamas
leader Yahya Sinwar and is considered part of the second generation of
Hamas leadership, following the movement's founders.

He headed the political wing of Hamas's parliamentary bloc and was
re-elected to the group's political bureau in 2021.

Following the killing of Sinwar and Rawhi Mushtaha during the ongoing
war, Bardaweel was regarded as Hamas's highest-ranking political
leader.

The air strike that killed Bardaweel was part of one of the most
intense waves of aerial bombardment in southern Gaza since the
collapse of the ceasefire agreement last Tuesday.

A spokesperson for the Palestinian Red Crescent Society told the BBC
that Israeli forces were surrounding several of the organisation's
ambulances as they attempted to reach an area hit by an Israeli strike
in Rafah.

He added that several paramedics were wounded, and contact had been
lost with one of the trapped teams, which has been besieged for hours.

The Israeli military issued evacuation orders for residents of the Tel
al-Sultan neighbourhood in western Rafah after the area was hit by
heavy shelling and a limited ground assault.

The attack included tank fire from Israeli forces positioned along the
Philadelphi Corridor on the border with Egypt, and helicopters also
took part in the assault.

Alaa al-Din Sabah, a resident of the neighbourhood, said in a voice
message to the BBC: "Bullets are raining down on us like it's pouring.
A woman was shot and is bleeding. Ambulances couldn't reach her."

"I can see one of the paramedics lying on the ground, screaming."

The Israeli military launched a campaign to destroy Hamas in response
to an unprecedented cross-border attack on 7 October 2023, in which
about 1,200 people were killed and 251 were taken hostage.

More than 49,500 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza since then, the
Hamas-run health ministry says, and there is large-scale destruction
to homes and infrastructure in the Strip.
