GERMAN PARLIAMENT PASSES HISTORIC DEBT REFORM, PAVING THE WAY FOR
HIGHER DEFENSE SPEND

Germany's chancellor-in-waiting and leader of the Christian Democratic
Union party (CDU) Friedrich Merz and Germany's Defence Minister Boris
Pistorius attend an extraordinary session of the outgoing lower house
of parliament, the Bundestag, for a vote to adopt the draft law
brought by the SPD and CDU/CSU parliamentary groups to reform
constitutional debt rules and set up a 500 billion euro infrastructure
fund, in Berlin, Germany March 18, 2025. 
Annegret Hilse | Reuters

Germany's Bundestag on Tuesday voted in favor of a major fiscal
package, which includes changes to long-standing debt policies to
enable higher defense spending and a 500 billion euro ($548 billion)
infrastructure and climate fund.

Some 513 parliamentary members voted in favor of the plan, while 207
voted against it. There were no abstentions.

More than two thirds of parliament were needed to support the package
in order for it to pass. The law also needs to be approved by the
Bundesrat, a body representing the country's states, on Friday to
become enshrined in Germany's constitution.

Under the proposed new laws, defense and certain security expenditures
above a certain threshold would no longer be subject to the debt
brake, which limits how much debt the government can take on and
dictates the size of the federal government's structural budget
deficit.

Loans taken on as part of the infrastructure fund would also be exempt
from the debt brake, while Germany's states would also have greater
flexibility around debt.

Carsten Brzeski, global head of macro at ING, on Tuesday said the vote
meant the debt brake rule is now "not officially dead but buried
alive."  

"Germany has given up on leading the group of fiscal frugals in Europe
for the sake of boosting its economy," he added.

The Christian Democratic Union, alongside its sister party the
Christian Social Union, which jointly won the largest share of votes
in Germany's national election in February, proposed the fiscal shift
in collaboration with the Social Democratic Party. The factions appear
likely to form the incoming coalition government, with the fiscal
reform package a by-product of talks about a potential governing
partnership between them.

A TIGHT VOTE

Time pressure to pass the reforms is high as they require changes to
the constitution and need the support of two thirds of both parliament
and the Bundesrat.

This was likely only going to be possible before the newly elected
parliament comes together for the first time next week, as parties
opposing the fiscal package will then have a larger share of the vote
and could potentially block the plans.

Several of the parties that oppose the reforms have also
unsuccessfully launched legal challenges to hinder the vote.

Germany's chancellor-in-waiting and leader of the Christian Democratic
Union party (CDU) Friedrich Merz walks, on the day of an extraordinary
session of the outgoing lower house of parliament, the Bundestag, for
a vote to adopt the draft law brought by the SPD and CDU/CSU
parliamentary groups to reform constitutional debt rules and set up a
500 billion euro infrastructure fund, in Berlin, Germany March 18,
2025. 
Liesa Johannssen | Reuters

In the lead-up to the Tuesday vote, the CDU-CSU and SPD also had to
negotiate for the backing of Germany's Green Party, ultimately
agreeing on a compromise that includes 100 billion euros of the
infrastructure fund being allocated to climate and economic
transformation efforts and a broadening of the security-related issues
exempted from the debt brake.

A BOOST TO THE ECONOMY?

Analysts and economists have broadly reacted positively to the reform
plans, viewing them as a potentially major boost for Germany's
struggling economy.

Robin Winkler, chief German economist at Deutsche Bank Research, urged
caution, however, suggesting there was still work to be done for the
incoming government.

"This is a historic fiscal regime shift, arguably the largest since
German reunification," he said Tuesday after the vote. "Yet, as with
reunification, a fiscal expansion does not guarantee success: the next
government will need to deliver structural reforms to turn this fiscal
package into sustainable growth."

The German economy narrowly skirted a technical recession — or two
consecutive quarters of economic contraction — throughout 2023 and
2024, but has been effectively stagnant.

The OECD on Monday said it was now projecting Germany's gross domestic
product to grow by an annual 0.4% this year, down from the previously
forecast 0.7% expansion. German economic institute Ifo, meanwhile,
said it was cutting its outlook for the country's economy to 0.2%
growth year-on-year.

It comes as Germany is facing sustained infrastructure problems, as
well as issues in key industries such as housebuilding and autos. The
country is also battling the threat of potential tariffs imposed by
U.S. President Donald Trump on imports to the U.S. from Europe —
which could be especially difficult for Germany due to its high levels
of trade with the U.S.

 Get the CNBC Daily Open report in your inbox every morning and keep
up to date with the markets wherever you are. 
Subscribe 
