ALLAHABAD HIGH COURT: INDIA'S TOP COURT HALTS 'SHOCKING' RULING ON
SEXUAL ASSAULT OF CHILD

INDIA'S TOP COURT HALTS 'SHOCKING' RULING ON SEXUAL ASSAULT OF CHILD

India's Supreme Court has put on hold a recent high court court which
said that "grabbing [the] breasts" of a girl and breaking off the
drawstrings of her lower garment could not be considered an attempt to
rape.

The Allahabad high court had ruled last week that the offence could
only be described as "aggravated sexual assault", which involves a
lesser punishment.

The top court judges said some of the comments in the high court order
depicted "a total lack of sensitivity" on the part of the judge who
wrote it.

The high court ruling led to outrage in India.

On Wednesday, the two-judge Supreme Court bench of Justice BR Gavai
and Justice Augustine described the 17 March order as "shocking",
especially since it was not delivered "on the spur of the moment" but
had been well thought through after being reserved for four months.

The top court has now sent notices to India's federal authorities and
state government in Uttar Pradesh, where the court in Allahabad (now
called Prayagraj) is located.

According to the prosecution, the case involves an 11-year-old girl
whose mother has alleged that the two accused offered a lift to her
daughter on their motorbike, promising to drop her home.

She sent the child with the men who were from the same village and
known to them.

"The accused persons stopped their motorcycle on the way to the
village and started grabbing her breasts," the high court order said,
adding that one of the men dragged her beneath a culvert and "broke
her pyjama [lower garment] string".

She was rescued by some villagers who were passing by and were alerted
by her cries for help, forcing her attackers to flee.

The accused have denied the allegations against them.

The high court ruling was based on the argument that "attempt to rape"
was different from "preparation", legal website Live Law reported,
quoting from the high court order.

"The prosecution must establish that it had gone beyond the stage of
preparation. The difference between preparation and actual attempt to
commit an offence consists chiefly in the greater degree of
determination," the order said.

The controversial ruling led to outrage in the country with many
describing the judgement as "atrocious".

Senior lawyer Indira Jaising told a TV channel that what happened with
the child "goes beyond preparation" and in legal terms "it is attempt
to commit rape".

"How do you prove intent? It is proved by actions that precede the
actual act of rape," she said, adding that the fact that the girl was
dragged to a secluded place meant it had gone beyond preparation.

India's Women and Child Welfare Minister Annapurna Devi told news
agency Press Trust of India that "the high court ruling has no place
in a civilised society and that it will have an adverse impact on
society".
