THE ATLANTIC PUBLISHES FULL SIGNAL THREAD WITH HEGSETH, WALTZ AFTER
TRUMP SAYS TEXTS NOT CLASSIFIED

(L-R) US National Security Advisor Mike Waltz speaks with Defense
Secretary Pete Hegseth as US President Donald Trump meets with French
President Emmanuel Macron in the Oval Office of the White House in
Washington, DC, on February 24, 2025. 
Ludovic Marin | Afp | Getty Images

The Atlantic on Wednesday published the full text thread from the
Trump administration's Signal group that accidentally included a
prominent journalist in discussions of pending U.S. military strikes.

Jeffrey Goldberg, The Atlantic's editor in chief, had withheld some of
the contents of the thread in his bombshell report Monday revealing
that he had been looped in on plans to carry out attacks on Houthi
targets in Yemen.

Goldberg noted in that report that some of the texts contained
information that "could conceivably have been used to harm American
military and intelligence personnel," had they been read by a U.S.
adversary.

But Goldberg and his outlet decided to publish the full texts after
President Donald Trump and others in the group chat declared Tuesday
that none of the messages were classified, and said that they did not
contain "war plans," as The Atlantic's initial headline stated.

The texts from the "Houthi PC small group" published Wednesday morning
are unredacted, save for the name of one CIA intelligence officer, The
Atlantic said.

The Atlantic

White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt in an X post homed in on
the magazine's decision to describe the thread as "Attack Plans,"
rather than war plans, in its latest headline.

"The Atlantic has conceded: these were NOT war plans,'" Leavitt wrote.

"This entire story was another hoax written by a Trump-hater who is
well-known for his sensationalist spin."

Goldberg responded directly later Wednesday morning: "I don't even
know what that means ... What are they arguing, that an attack is
different than a war?"

"She's playing some sort of weird semantic game," he said in an MSNBC
interview.

The Trump administration itself has confirmed the veracity of the
Signal group.

The Atlantic

Director of national intelligence Tulsi Gabbard and CIA Director John
Ratcliffe, who were included in it, said in Senate testimony Tuesday
that the texts were not classified. Trump later said the same: "It
wasn't classified information."

Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth said Monday, "Nobody was texting war
plans. And that's all I have to say about that."

Trump's national security advisor Michael Waltz, who reportedly
invited Goldberg to the group, suggested in remarks on Tuesday that
somehow the journalist may have "deliberately" added himself to it.

Waltz provided no evidence for the claim, but said in a Fox News
interview that he discussed the matter with Elon Musk, adding, "We've
got the best technical minds looking at how this happened."

READ MORE CNBC POLITICS COVERAGE

	* Trump pledges auto, pharma tariffs in 'near future,' sowing more
trade confusion
	* Tesla showroom in Texas targeted with 'incendiary devices', police
say
	* Concerns about espionage rise as Trump and Musk fire thousands of
federal workers
	* Political and financial turmoil set to dominate Turkey, risking
economic stabilization plans
	* Republican interim SEC chief Mark Uyeda cast the sole vote against
suing Musk

Trump, Waltz, Leavitt and others have peppered their remarks with
personal attacks on Goldberg.

Goldberg wrote Wednesday that the statements from Trump and his
officials "have led us to believe that people should see the texts in
order to reach their own conclusions."

"There is a clear public interest in disclosing the sort of
information that Trump advisers included in nonsecure communications
channels, especially because senior administration figures are
attempting to downplay the significance of the messages that were
shared," he wrote.

The newly revealed texts show Hegseth sharing operational details
about the pending Houthi attacks about two hours before the first
strike occurred on March 15.

He gave the group — which included Goldberg — information about
the timing of the attacks and the weapons to be used, writing:

TEAM UPDATE:

TIME NOW (1144et): Weather is FAVORABLE. Just CONFIRMED w/CENTCOM we
are a GO for mission launch.

1215et: F-18s LAUNCH (1st strike package)

1345: "Trigger Based" F-18 1st Strike Window Starts (Target Terrorist
is @ his Known Location so SHOULD BE ON TIME – also, Strike Drones
Launch (MQ-9s)

1410: More F-18s LAUNCH (2nd strike package)

1415: Strike Drones on Target (THIS IS WHEN THE FIRST BOMBS WILL
DEFINITELY DROP, pending earlier "Trigger Based" targets)

1536 F-18 2nd Strike Starts – also, first sea-based Tomahawks
launched.

Goldberg in Wednesday's report wrote: "If this text had been received
by someone hostile to American interests—or someone merely
indiscreet, and with access to social media—the Houthis would have
had time to prepare for what was meant to be a surprise attack on
their strongholds."

"The consequences for American pilots could have been catastrophic,"
he wrote.

Vice President JD Vance, who was also on the Signal thread, wrote on X
after the texts were published, "It's very clear Goldberg oversold
what he had."

Democrats have reacted to The Atlantic's reporting with furious
indignation. Sens. Mark Warner, D-Va., and Mark Kelly, D-Ariz., have
both called on Hegseth to resign.

"This is what happens when you put unqualified people in important
jobs where lives are on the line," Kelly said in a statement.

Trump suggested Tuesday that no one would be fired for using Signal to
discuss the attack plans, or for mistakenly adding Goldberg to the
sensitive discussions.

"We've pretty much looked into it," he said.

THIS IS DEVELOPING NEWS. PLEASE CHECK BACK FOR UPDATES.

