CHINA'S ELECTRIC CARMAKER BYD SALES BEAT ELON MUSK'S TESLA

CHINESE ELECTRIC CARMAKER BYD SALES BEAT TESLA

Chinese electric vehicle (EV) maker BYD has reported annual revenue
for 2024 that has leapfrogged rival Tesla.

The Shenzhen-based firm says revenue rose by 29% to come in at 777
billion yuan ($107bn; £83bn), boosted by sales of its hybrid
vehicles. This topped the $97.7bn reported by Elon Musk's Tesla.

BYD has also just launched a lower-priced car to rival Tesla's Model
3, which has long been the top selling EV in China.

It comes as Tesla faces a backlash around the world over Musk's ties
to US President Donald Trump, while Chinese carmakers have been hit
with tariffs in Western countries.

BYD sold around the same number of EVs as Tesla last year – 1.76
million compared to 1.79 million, respectively.

But when sales of the Chinese company's hybrid cars are taken into
account it is much bigger, selling a record 4.3 million vehicles
globally in 2024.

On Sunday, BYD announced a new model to take on Tesla.

Its Qin L model has a starting price in China of 119,800 yuan, while a
basic version of Tesla's Model 3 is priced at 235,500 yuan.

It comes as Chinese consumers are cutting spending in the face of
economic challenges, including a property crisis, slowing growth, and
high local government debt.

Last week, BYD's founder Wang Chuanfu announced new battery charging
technology, which he said could charge an EV in five minutes.

That compares with around 15 minutes to charge a Tesla using its
supercharger system.

In February, BYD announced that its so-called "God's Eye" advanced
driver-assistance technology would be available free in all its
models.

Shares in the firm, which is backed by veteran US investor Warren
Buffett, have jumped by more than 50% so far this year.

A backlash against Musk and his carmaker has gathered momentum since
he was appointed head of the Trump administration's Department for
Government Efficiency (DOGE), which has been tasked with slashing
federal government spending.

Musk has also intervened in politics abroad, including giving his
backing to far-right party Alternative für Deutschland ahead of
Germany's parliamentary election and criticising UK politicians such
as Prime Minister Keir Starmer.

Meanwhile, China's EV manufacturers have been targeted with tariffs in
large parts of the world, including the US and the European Union.
