DONALD TRUMP THREATENS US TARIFFS ON COUNTRIES BUYING VENEZUELAN OIL

TRUMP THREATENS TARIFFS ON BUYERS OF VENEZUELAN OIL

President Donald Trump has threatened to impose tariffs of 25% on US
imports from countries that purchase oil from Venezuela.

Trump described the move as a "secondary tariff" aimed at punishing
the Latin American country "for numerous reasons", including allegedly
"purposefully" sending gang members to the US.

Separately, Trump suggested he was softening his plans for tariffs on
imports from other countries, saying he "may give a lot of countries
breaks".

Markets ended the day higher after the comments, which appeared to
confirm reports that he was narrowing the taxes he plans to announce
on 2 April.

Trump has previously said he was looking to impose "reciprocal"
tariffs on countries around the world, outlining plans for a system
whereby "they charge us, we charge them".

But on Monday he suggested the White House might be "nicer than that"
when it came to the new tariff rates.

"We may take less than what they're charging because they've charged
us so much, I don't think they could take it," he said, while also
acknowledging that some countries might be spared from the measures.

Leading share indexes in the US, which have fallen steeply in recent
weeks following Trump's tariff threats, all rose on Monday.

The S&P 500 closed 1.7% higher, the Dow Jones Industrial Average
closed up 1.2% while the Nasdaq finished 2.2% ahead.

Tariffs are a tax on imports. They are paid by the company that is
buying the goods as opposed to the overseas business that is selling
the product.

Since taking office in January, Trump has repeatedly used tariffs - or
the threat of them - in an attempt to gain leverage in a range of
disputes, only some of which are related to trade.

He said on Monday he still planned to impose tariffs on specific
products, including cars, lumber and computer chips, claiming the
possibility of such measures were already helping to spur investment
in the US.

His latest threat against Venezuela is expected to raise pressure on
current buyers of oil - which include China, India and Spain - to
reduce their dealings in the country, which have provided a critical
financial lifeline to the Venezuelan government.

Trump has already raised tariffs on Chinese imports to at least 20%
since February. He told reporters he intended the latest announcement
to be added on top of existing levies.

For Venezuela, China is a major buyer of its oil. But Venezuela is not
a big source of crude for China, which imported more than 11 million
barrels per day last year.

The US is a major buyer of Venezuelan oil, as a result of exemptions
from economic sanctions granted to US oil firm Chevron.

The Trump administration has previously signalled its intention to end
those exemptions.

On Monday, the administration updated its order, giving Chevron until
27 May to wind down its operations in Venezuela, extending the
deadline by two months.

Chevron declined to comment.

Oil prices rose more than 1% after the announcement.
