US TARIFFS COULD EXTEND GERMANY'S RECESSION, SAYS BUNDESBANK CHIEF

US TARIFFS COULD EXTEND GERMANY'S RECESSION, SAYS BANK

Tariffs on goods being imported into the US could tip Europe's largest
economy into another recession, according to the president of
Germany's central bank.

Germany's economy has contracted for the past two years and with
tariffs, the country "could expect a recession for this year" too,
Joachim Nagel, the head of the Deutsche Bundesbank, told the BBC World
Service in an exclusive interview.

Without tariffs, the bank forecasts the German economy will stagnate
but still grow, by about 0.2%, he added.

He said "there are only losers" when imposing tariffs, and supported
the EU's retaliatory measures against US President Donald Trump's 25%
tariff on all steel imports from overseas.

Tariffs are a central part of Trump's overall economic vision - he
hopes they will boost US manufacturing and protect jobs, but critics
say in the immediate term they will raise prices for US consumers.

In response to Trump's move, the EU has hit back with import taxes on
a range of US products, which are set to come into force on 1 April.

Mr Nagel called Trump's tariff policy "economics from the past" and
"definitely not a good idea".

A global trade war is one of the concerns from tariffs and retaliatory
tariffs, he said, but added it was a "necessity" for the EU to react
"because if something is working against you, you can't accept a
policy like this".

However, he suggested that when the US realises that the price that
needs to be paid will be "highest on the side of the Americans", it
will allow further opportunity for all sides to come to a different
resolution.

"I hope that in the end, good policy will succeed," he said.

Germany's export economy had been one of its strengths in past
decades, and its cars such as BMW, Mercedes, Volkswagens and Audis are
popular in the US.

Mr Nagel refuted claims that Germany was the "sick man of Europe",
saying it had a "strong economic basis" and "strong small and medium
sized companies".

"But nevertheless, when you are exposed to an export-oriented model,
then you are more exposed in a situation when tariffs are going up and
there are so many uncertainties, so many unknowns," he added.

He said Germany could overcome such challenges "over the next couple
of years".

However, German consumers are set to face higher prices.

The head of Germany's BGA federation of wholesale, foreign trade and
service, Dirk Jandura, warned on Wednesday that Germans might have to
dig deeper into their pockets to pay for American products, such as
orange juice, bourbon and peanut butter, in supermarkets.

'TECTONIC CHANGES'

Commenting on recent unprecedented changes in Germany's economic
policy, which were altered allow the country to borrow more to spend
on defence and infrastructure, Mr Nagel said it was an "extraordinary
measure" for an "extraordinary time".

"The whole world is facing tectonic changes which makes the current
situation very different from those seen in the past, hence the fiscal
change," he said.

He added the policy change would allow Germany some financial
breathing room for recovery in the next few years, adding it provided
a "stability signal to the market".
