BADAR KHAN SURI: THE INDIAN SCHOLAR ARRESTED IN US OVER PALESTINIAN
SYMPATHIES

THE INDIAN SCHOLAR ARRESTED IN US OVER FATHER-IN-LAW'S HAMAS LINK

It was an invitation from a classmate 15 years ago that changed the
life of Badar Khan Suri, an Indian scholar now facing deportation from
the US over accusations he is linked to a Hamas member.

On that summer evening, Mr Suri had been sitting outside his
department at Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia university when a classmate
announced that an international aid convoy was set to go to Gaza - the
Palestinian territory run by the armed Islamist group Hamas and under
blockade by Israel.

To students of conflict studies, the caravan - of more than 150 people
from several Asian countries - offered a once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity to witness one of the world's most contentious disputes up
close.

Mr Suri happily agreed to participate, a classmate recalled to the
BBC.

It was during this trip that he met Mapheze Saleh, a Palestinian and
the daughter of a former Hamas adviser, whom he married a few months
later.

After living in Delhi for almost a decade, the couple moved to the US
where Mr Suri joined the prestigious Georgetown University as a
postdoctoral fellow.

He had been living in Virginia for nearly three years when the police
knocked on his door on the evening of 17 March and arrested him.

Three days later, on 20 March, Tricia McLaughlin, the assistant
secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, tweeted that Mr Suri
was being detained for his "close connections to a known or suspected
terrorist, a senior adviser to Hamas". He has denied the allegations.

This action follows President Donald Trump's crackdown on illegal
immigrants and activists involved in pro-Palestinian campus protests
which authorities have accused of fuelling antisemitism and supporting
Hamas. The group is designated a terrorist organisation by the US.
India, however, has not banned Hamas.

Although Mr Suri, who entered the US legally on a student visa, has
had his deportation blocked by a US court, the Trump administration's
allegations have shocked those who know him back home.

His acquaintances describe him as a soft-spoken, shy and hardworking
student with a broad knowledge of the world, while his classmates and
teachers said they found allegations of him having ties with Hamas
"tenuous".

India has historically supported the Palestinian cause. But it has
also developed close, strategic ties with Israel in recent years, with
Delhi often refraining from criticising Israel's actions.

Even then, "by no stretch of imagination can Suri be associated with
anything unlawful", one of his professors from Jamia told the BBC.

"Having a view on the ongoing conflict is not a crime. As a conflict
studies scholar, it is well within his professional mandate to share
his analysis of the war in Gaza."

Those who accompanied him on the trip held similar views.

Feroze Mithiborwala, one of the organisers of the caravan, remembered
Mr Suri as an intelligent, young man.

"He always took a secular stance in our discussions. He was not some
right-wing Islamist type of character," he said.

The trip began in December 2010 from Delhi. As India's neighbour
Pakistan refused to give a travel permit to the group, the convoy had
to travel to Iran, Turkey, Syria and Egypt before finally reaching
Gaza.

The route, most of which was covered by bus, offered much for a
student of peace and conflict studies, one of Mr Suri's friends who
also went on the tour said.

Throughout the trip, he was deeply moved by the sufferings he
witnessed in Gaza and focused on providing aid to the widowed and
elderly, he added.

The caravan, in many ways, "brought Mr Suri closer to the Palestinian
cause", but his interest was largely academic, said another classmate
who was in touch with him until days before his arrest.

The second and the last time Mr Suri went to Gaza was for his own
wedding with Ms Saleh.

A US citizen, Ms Saleh had been working as a translator and volunteer
in Gaza at that time.

Her father, who has lived in the US, is a former adviser to Ismail
Haniyeh, the Hamas leader killed by Israel last year, according to a
statement submitted by her in court.

In 2010, her father left the Gaza government and "started the House of
Wisdom in 2011 to encourage peace and conflict resolution in Gaza", it
adds.

When Ms Saleh and Mr Suri first met, they did not speak much. But they
connected again a few months later, a friend who accompanied him on
the caravan told the BBC.

Their wedding made headlines in India, as the couple moved back to
Delhi and continued to live there for about eight years.

Ms Saleh enrolled herself for a masters degree in Jamia and later
worked at the Qatar embassy. In 2023, Mr Suri moved to the US and Ms
Saleh followed him.

He was months away from completing his fellowship when he was
arrested.

Mr Suri's father said it pained him to see his son in this situation.

"He has no connections with Hamas or Palestine [other than his
marriage]. His sin is that he is married to a Palestinian woman," he
said.

But he is hopeful that his son will not be deported. "After all, these
are merely allegations. There is no proof of any wrongdoing," he
added.

_Follow BBC News India on _Instagram_, _YouTube_, _X_ and _Facebook
