THOUSANDS TURN OUT IN TURKEY FOR PROTESTS AFTER MORE THAN 1,400
ARRESTS

THOUSANDS TURN OUT FOR TURKEY PROTESTS AFTER MORE THAN 1,400 ARRESTS

Thousands of people in Turkey have turned out for a seventh night of
protests which have so far seen more than 1,400 people detained,
including students, journalists and lawyers.

The nightly unrest began last Wednesday when the city's Mayor Ekrem
Imamoglu - who is seen as the President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's main
political rival - was arrested on corruption charges.

Rights groups and the UN have condemned the arrests and the use of
force by police on the protesters.

Imamoglu said the allegations against him were politically motivated,
a claim the Turkish president has denied.

Speaking to a group of young people at a Ramadan fast-breaking meal in
Ankara on Tuesday, President Erdogan urged patience and common sense
amid what he described as "very sensitive days."

He added that people who want "to turn this country into a place of
chaos have nowhere to go", and the path protesters have taken is "a
dead end".

On Tuesday evening, thousands of students from many universities in
Istanbul met in Maçka Park and then marched towards Şişli.

Authorities in Istanbul banned protests and closed some roads "in
order to maintain public order" and "prevent any provocative actions
that may occur".

As students marched through the Nisantasi district they chanted
"government, resign!" and waved flags and banners as they were watched
by a large deployment of riot police.

Many students had their faces covered with scarves or masks, and
acknowledged they feared being identified by the police.

Turkey's main opposition party, the Republican People's Party (CHP),
said that Tuesday's rally outside Istanbul's City Hall would be its
last in a run of nightly gatherings - and that it is planning a rally
in the city on Saturday.

"Are you ready for a big rally in a large square in Istanbul on
Saturday?" Ozgur Ozel told crowds.

"To support Imamoglu, to object to his arrest, to object to the
detention of each of our mayors. To demand transparent, open, live
broadcast trials, to say that we have had enough and we want early
elections."

Since last Wednesday, Turkey's interior minister said 1,418 protesters
have been detained following the days of demonstrations that the
government has deemed "illegal."

Posting on social media Ali Yerlikaya wrote: "While there are
currently 979 suspects in custody, 478 people will be brought to court
today.

"No concessions will be made to those who attempt to terrorise the
streets, to attack our national and moral values, and to our police
officers."

Elsewhere on Tuesday, seven journalists appeared in court including
AFP news agency photographer Yasin Akgül who had been covering the
demonstrations.

AFP chairman Fabrice Fries has written a letter addressed to the
Turkish presidency urging Erdogan to "intervene" in Akgul's
imprisonment which he described as "unacceptable".

"Yasin Akgül was not part of the protest," Fries said. "As a
journalist, he was covering one of the many demonstrations that have
been organized in the country since Wednesday 19 March.

"He has taken exactly 187 photographs since the start of the protests,
each one a witness to his work as a journalist."

In Washington, Secretary of State Marco Rubio voiced "concerns"
following a meeting with Turkish Foreign Minister Hakan Fidan, the US
State Department said in a statement.

Imamoglu was one of more than 100 people detained last week as part of
an investigation. Others arrested included politicians, journalists
and businessmen.

His arrest does not prevent his candidacy or election as president,
but he will not be able to run if he is convicted of any of the
charges against him.

The opposition mayor is seen as one of the most formidable rivals of
Erdogan, who has held office in Turkey for 22 years as both prime
minister and president.

Erdogan's term in office is due to expire in 2028, and under the
current rules, he cannot stand again – but he could call an early
election or try to change the constitution to allow him to remain in
power for longer.

Turkey's Ministry of Justice has criticised those connecting Erdogan
to the arrests, and insisted on its judicial independence.
