WHO'S WHO IN GERMAN ELECTIONS AND WHY THIS VOTE IS IMPORTANT

German voters decide on Sunday who will run their next government,
with Friedrich Merz's conservative Christian Democrats favourite to
become the biggest party in power.

Reviving the European Union's biggest economy as well as immigration
and security are the main issues in this snap election, triggered by
the collapse of centre-left Chancellor Olaf Scholz's coalition late
last year.

We assess what and who you need to know ahead of the vote for
Germany's next parliament, the Bundestag.

WHY THIS VOTE MATTERS

After months of political deadlock and at a time of global
uncertainty, Germans and their European allies are looking to this
election to provide clear leadership and direction, as faith in their
longstanding US alliance wanes.

At home, Germany's faltering powerhouse economy is crying out for an
overhaul after two years of recession - buffeted by high energy prices
prompted by Russia's war in Ukraine and stiff Chinese competition.

A series of deadly attacks has heightened pressure for reform to
immigration and asylum rules. Immigrants have been accused of carrying
out three fatal attacks during the election campaign - in Magdeburg,
Aschaffenburg and Munich.

Security fears and rising discontent with politicians have propelled
the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party into an expected
second place.

If the AfD double their seats in parliament, it would present a
challenge to the longstanding firewall - _brandmauer_ - that has so
far blocked the mainstream parties from working with them.

More than 59 million Germans aged 18 and over are eligible to take
part in this vote for their next parliament.

Voting takes place between 08:00-18:00 (07:00-17:00 GMT) on Sunday,
although millions of postal votes have already been cast. The result
will become clear during the evening.

There are five candidates for chancellor.

If the biggest party can secure a coalition deal with one or two other
parties, the president will usually nominate its leader as chancellor.
Then parliament will hold a secret ballot to decide.

WHO ARE THE FIVE CANDIDATES FOR GERMAN CHANCELLOR?

The frontrunner in the race to run Germany is FRIEDRICH MERZ, whose
Christian Democrats (CDU) are up to 10 points ahead in the polls. He
was chosen as candidate for chancellor ahead of Markus Söder, the
leader of their sister party in Bavaria the Christian Social Union.

Aged 69 and 198cm (6ft 6in) in height, Merz is a plain-talking,
pro-business, social conservative who has spent years waiting in the
wings.

Eclipsed in the CDU by Angela Merkel in 2002, he eventually left
politics, served on the boards of investment banks and took up flying
as an amateur pilot.

Merz's first two bids to win the CDU leadership failed, against Merkel
in 2018 and then Armin Laschet who went on to lose the German election
in 2021.

Merz then took over the CDU and is running under the slogan "A Germany
we can be proud of again".

He has promised permanent border controls and faster asylum rules to
restrict immigration, and to cut taxes and slash €50bn in welfare
spending in a bid to kickstart Germany's faltering economy. He has
also promised to bolster aid for Ukraine.

But he provoked a furious backlash ahead of the election when he
sought to tighten immigration rules by relying on the votes of the
far-right AfD, and he ultimately failed.

Although Merz has ruled out working with the AfD, former CDU
chancellor Angela Merkel said he was "wrong" to accept AfD votes and
he has faced big protests.

He has also promised greater leadership from Germany in Europe, and
beefed-up support for Ukraine, refusing to rule out future membership
of Nato.

OLAF SCHOLZ has already served more than three years as chancellor, at
the head of an unpopular coalition that fell apart in a row over
loosening Germany's strict debt rules.

His government struggled from the start, largely because of the effect
of Russia's full-scale war in Ukraine on Germany's economy.

Germany became Ukraine's biggest aid-provider in Europe. Scholz spoke
of a _Zeitenwende _(turning point) in boosting German defence policy
and military spending - but he was accused of acting too slowly or too
late. He now promises European support for Ukraine "for as long as
necessary" and rejects the idea of any dictated peace.

Scholz has backed faster deportation of failed asylum seekers and his
government reimposed border checks which he says have brought asylum
requests down by a third in one year.

Scholz's Social Democrats (SPD) want to establish a "Germany fund" to
boost investment and to raise the minimum wage to €15 (£12.50) an
hour from €12.82.

Many in the party believed he should have allowed colleague Boris
Pistorius to run for chancellor instead.

However, the SPD has joined conservatives in the past and although
Scholz said he could no longer trust Merz, the Social Democrats remain
potential partners.

ALICE WEIDEL, 46, is the first AfD candidate for chancellor since the
party was created in 2013. She has also basked in the support of
billionaire Elon Musk, and was rewarded with a meeting with US
Vice-President JD Vance during his visit to Munich.

Weidel has little chance of winning power, but she has become popular
with young voters on TikTok, amassing more than 870,00 followers, and
she has reached far more of the population with repeated appearances
in TV election debates.

Co-led by Tino Chrupalla, the AfD has already secured one recent
victory, in September's state election in Thuringia in the east. And
while he and Weidel hope for big advances, their main aim is to pave
the way for even greater success in four years' time.

Elon Musk said the ex-Goldman Sachs analyst could not be a right-wing
extremist as she "has a same-sex partner from Sri Lanka".

And yet she has backed the mass deportation of migrants, embracing the
highly controversial term "remigration" - which she defines as
deporting criminals and "illegal" migrants.

She also wants to end sanctions on Russia, repairing the destroyed
Nord Stream gas pipelines; and she wants to tear down wind turbines,
which she calls "windmills of shame", even though they now provide a
quarter of Germany's electricity.

Party supporters have cheered her with the slogan _Alice für
Deutschland _(Alice for Germany), which sounds similar to a banned
Nazi slogan _Alles_ _für Deutschland._

ROBERT HABECK'S Greens played a key role in the Scholz government as
vice-chancellor and economy minister.

But one of his flagship policies, phasing out fossil-fuel heating
systems in Germany, had to be watered down and led to a dive in the
government's poll ratings. He rejects any return to nuclear energy,
and calls for more affordable access to renewable energy which by the
end of last year supplied 63.4% of Germany's electricity needs.

Habeck, 55, has taken a strong line on aid for Ukraine, and he has
forcefully criticised Friedrich Merz for relying on votes from the AfD
in parliament.

Relations with Merz are awkward, after he accused the CDU leader of
disqualifying himself as chancellor and Merz has described Halbeck as
a "representative for heat pumps".

Like Alice Weidel's AfD, SAHRA WAGENKNECHT and her BSW party back
closer relations with Russia and has built a strong support base in
eastern Germany.

Wagenknecht calls her politics "left conservativism" and presents
herself as an alternative to the AfD, backing strict limits on asylum
and immigration.

She shares the AfD's opposition to German military support for Ukraine
and has been accused of parroting Kremlin narratives on the war.

But she may struggle to reach the 5% national threshold to get into
parliament.

HOW DOES VOTING WORK?

Elections to the Bundestag usually take place every four years - this
one had been due on 28 September 2025 but was brought forward because
of the collapse of the Scholz government.

Over-18s get two votes, which will decide who sits in the Bundestag,
now slimmed down from 733 seats to 630.

One vote is to elect members of the Bundestag directly in 299
constituencies. The second is to choose a political party in one of
the 16 states that you live in.

Any party that wins 5% of that second vote is allowed to enter the
Bundestag, and they then use their state lists to pick their MPs.

Complex rules on allocating seats have been abolished, but the new
rules mean some candidates who win their local races may lose out, if
their parties do not do as well in the state as a whole.

One of the old rules will remain. Any party that fails to poll 5% of
the vote can still get in, if they win in three of the 299
constituencies.

WHICH PARTIES COULD FORM GERMANY'S NEXT GOVERNMENT?

The conservative CDU and CSU parties are favourite to win the most
seats, but by ruling out a coalition with the AfD, Merz has narrowed
their options of potential partners in government.

That makes a deal most likely with the Social Democrats.

Many in the SPD are reluctant to work with Merz after last month's
migration row, but a so-called grand coalition of the two parties is
still on the cards.

If they fail to secure more than half the seats in the Bundestag
between them for an absolute majority, they may need a third party,
most likely the Greens.
