INTERNATIONAL 'REASSURANCE' FORCE PLANNED FOR UKRAINE CEASEFIRE

REASSURANCE, NOT PEACEKEEPING: WHAT UKRAINE COALITION FORCE WILL AND
WON'T DO

The potential Western troop deployment to Ukraine being discussed in
London should be described as a "reassurance force" rather than a
"peacekeeping force", defence and diplomatic sources say.

Currently dubbed the Multinational Force Ukraine or MFU, it would be
sent to the country to cement any ceasefire and encourage long-term
confidence in the country.

The focus would be on providing Ukraine with air cover to keep its
skies safe and a naval presence in the Black Sea to encourage trade.

The deployment of so-called "boots on the ground" - probably about
20,000 strong - would in terms of size not be big enough to enforce
any peace.

Instead, the troops - provided by a so-called "coalition of the
willing" - would most likely be deployed to protect cities, ports and
major energy infrastructure.

One option being considered is that the MFU might not operate in the
east of Ukraine near the front line to try to reassure Russia it poses
no offensive threat.

Russian President Vladimir Putin and the Kremlin have said repeatedly
they would not agree any ceasefire if European and other forces were
deployed to Ukraine.

The sources say any multinational operation in Ukraine would not be a
"peacekeeping force" and should not be described as such.

Peacekeeping forces - under the aegis of either the United Nations or
Nato - traditionally are impartial, operate with the consent of both
parties and use force only to defend themselves. The multinational
force being discussed would very much be on Ukraine's side, there to
help deter future Russian aggression.

At the moment, it is not expected that the multinational force on the
ground would monitor any ceasefire. That would be done by Ukrainian
troops on the frontline and Western surveillance assets in the air and
space.

The sources also say the coalition troops would not be deployed to
provide a so-called "tripwire force" - meaning a force smaller than
that of the opponent, designed to deter an attack without triggering
escalation - if Russia resumed its invasion of Ukraine.

They say the military impact of any allied deployment of about 20,000
troops would be limited compared to the number of troops on either
side of the front line.

Ukraine has almost a million military personnel, Russia's army is even
larger.

Much of the focus of Thursday's discussions is on how best any
international force can provide Ukraine with assets it does not have,
especially capability in the air.

So, there will be discussions about which countries can provide
warplanes to keep Ukraine's skies safe during a ceasefire.

There will also be discussions about how to make the Black Sea safe
for shipping. That may involve two components: how best to keep
shipping lanes clear of mines and what kind of naval task force could
provide a security presence in the sea.

The key uncertainty is whether the United States would provide any
air, satellite or intelligence cover for any European force on the
ground.

The US has thus far said it would not be willing to provide any
military "backstop".

The European strategy for now is to stop asking the US and instead
organise the best force and capability it can to ensure the security
of Ukraine in the future. Once the details are agreed, then the UK,
France and others would see if the European offer was substantial
enough for the US to have a change of heart and agree to play some
kind of role.

What all this planning depends on, of course, is some kind of
ceasefire being agreed in Ukraine.

While the US remains optimistic, many in Ukraine remain sceptical that
Russia even wants to end the fighting.
