GAZA CEASEFIRE DEAL - THE LATEST ON THE TRUCE

IS THE WAR STARTING AGAIN IN GAZA?

A ceasefire which had halted fighting between Israel and Hamas for two
months appears to be over following an intense wave of air strikes by
Israel on what it said were Hamas targets in the Gaza Strip.

The ceasefire laid out a path for permanently ending the war, and had
seen the release of hostages held by Hamas in exchange for Palestinian
prisoners held by Israel.

The war was triggered when Hamas attacked on Israel on 7 October 2023,
killing about 1,200 people and taking 251 back to Gaza as captives.

Israel responded with a massive military offensive, which killed more
than 48,500 Palestinians, Gaza's Hamas-run health ministry says.

WHY HAS ISRAEL LAUNCHED AIR STRIKES?

Israeli aircraft began attacking what the military said were Hamas
targets across Gaza in the early hours of 18 March. It was the most
extensive series of air strikes since the ceasefire began on 19
January.

The Israeli military described the action as "pre-emptive strikes...
based on Hamas's readiness to execute terror attacks, build up force
and re-arm". At the same time, the Israeli prime minister's office
said the action was ordered after Hamas's "repeated refusal to release
our hostages" and its rejection of new ceasefire proposals by the US
and mediators.

Hamas reacted furiously, accusing Israel of having "decided to
overturn the ceasefire agreement".

The ceasefire has been under increasing strain for several weeks
during which time indirect talks between Israel and Hamas about moving
forward had reached an impasse.

IS THE CEASEFIRE OVER?

It has not been declared over, though in practice the attacks by
Israel mean the truce is no longer.

Mediators though - the US, Qatar and Egypt - which spent months
brokering the ceasefire will almost certainly intensify efforts to
salvage the agreement.

Israel, however, has warned its new offensive will "continue as long
as necessary, and will expand beyond air strikes" - suggesting plans
for renewed military action on the ground.

The Israeli prime minister's office said the attacks that begun on 18
March were being carried out "in order to achieve the objectives of
the war". These have previously been declared as:

It is unclear, though, whether the statement means the military action
will continue until such aims have been met, or whether it is part of
a strategy to force Hamas to accept new ceasefire demands.

Although there was no fighting when Israel began its large-scale air
attacks, both sides had repeatedly accused the other of breaking the
ceasefire. It also happened at a time when the first phase of the
ceasefire had expired and the second not yet begun.

Israel said it accepted new US plans to keep the ceasefire going, but
Hamas said the proposals were unacceptable because it was not what had
been agreed upon in the original truce.

WHAT DOES THE CEASEFIRE DEAL BETWEEN ISRAEL AND HAMAS SAY?

The ceasefire was announced on 15 January and began four days later,
after months of negotiations led by the US, Qatar and Egypt. It is
based on a proposal set out by former US President Joe Biden in May
2024.

The deal involves three stages:

STAGE ONE

This officially lasted for 42 days, during which:

STAGE TWO

Negotiations on the second stage were meant to begin 16 days after the
start of stage one - but this did not happen. Like stage one, stage
two is also meant to be completed within 42 days.

According to the ceasefire deal, under stage two:

STAGE THREE

The final part of the agreement would see:

WHY HASN'T THE CEASEFIRE MOVED FORWARD?

Since 1 March, when stage one expired, the ceasefire has been in
limbo.

Stage two has not begun, even though talks were meant to have started
weeks ago.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said on 2 March that Israel
had accepted a plan by US envoy Steve Witkoff "to extend the temporary
ceasefire by 50 days" to discuss the second stage.

Netanyahu said that under the plan, half of the remaining hostages
would be released straight away, and the remainder released if an
agreement was reached.

Hamas said it rejected Israel's attempt to extend the first stage,
calling it "a blatant attempt to evade the agreement and avoid
entering into negotiations for the second phase".

The US - which has aligned itself more closely with Israel since
Donald Trump succeeded Joe Biden - said Hamas was "making a very bad
bet that time is on its side. It is not."

HOW MANY HOSTAGES ARE STILL HELD IN GAZA?

Israel says 59 hostages are still being held in Gaza, up to 24 of whom
are believed to be alive and at least 35 are presumed dead.

The 25 Israeli hostages released under the deal included female
Israeli soldiers, male and female Israeli civilians, and two children.
Five living Thai hostages were also freed outside of the deal.

The living hostages were released by Hamas in stage-managed events in
different locations in Gaza, where they were handed over to the Red
Cross.

The Red Cross then transferred them to Israeli forces inside Gaza,
before they were driven across the border into Israel and reunited
with their families. The freed hostages were then flown to hospitals
for medical checks.

The bodies of four hostages were also handed over in a spectacle
condemned by Israel and others. Four other bodies were returned
without a similar event.

WHO ARE THE PALESTINIAN PRISONERS FREED BY ISRAEL?

Around 1,900 Palestinian prisoners and detainees from Gaza were
released in the first phase of the deal.

Many of those released in the first exchange, and some in the
following three exchanges, had never been charged and were detained
without trial in Israeli prisons under what is called "administrative
detention", a process widely criticised by human rights groups.

Others had been found guilty of serious crimes, including being
convicted by Israeli courts of multiple murders. Dozens had been
serving life sentences.

The released prisoners have returned to the occupied West Bank and
East Jerusalem, and in some cases, Gaza. Dozens were deported abroad
due to the gravity of their crimes.

Israel has insisted that no-one who was involved in the 7 October
attacks will be freed.

The prisoners are among more than 10,000 Palestinians held by Israel
(not including detainees from Gaza held by the Israeli military) who
have either been convicted, or are suspected of "security" offences.

These range from bombings and other attacks, to belonging to banned
armed groups.

More than 3,000 people are reported to be held under administrative
detention.

HOW HAS AID BEEN DELIVERED TO GAZA?

Israel says 4,200 lorries carrying aid have entered Gaza each week
since the ceasefire was agreed in mid-January.

Half of the supplies were destined for the north of Gaza, where aid
had been hardest to deliver and food security experts had been warning
of imminent famine.

But from 2 March, Israel stopped supplies being allowed into the
territory.

Arab states and the UN condemned Israel's actions as a violation of
the ceasefire agreement and against international law.

Aid agencies have managed to store supplies, which means there is no
immediate danger to the civilian population. But the longer the ban
lasts, the greater the pressure on making supplies last.

Gaza is home to an estimated 2.1 million Palestinians, almost all of
whom had to leave their homes as Israel carried out continuous strikes
across the territory and issued mass evacuation orders for large
residential areas.

Hundreds of thousands of Gazans have returned home, but in many cases
there is nothing to go back to, with whole streets and neighbourhoods
standing in ruin.

Some 60% to 70% of buildings are estimated to have been damaged or
destroyed.

The process is also fraught with danger, with Israeli and Hamas forces
at a tense standoff, risks of unexploded ordnance, and warnings from
the Israeli military to civilians to stay clear of military positions.

Rebuilding Gaza will be a monumental task. The UN has estimated it
will cost at least $53bn (£41bn; €48.5bn), and it is likely to take
decades.

The human cost of the conflict will also be felt for many years to
come, with tens of thousands wounded and left with complex
psychological damage.
