ALICE GUO: THE PHILIPPINE MAYOR ACCUSED OF TRAFFICKING AND SPYING FOR
CHINA

THE SMALL-TOWN MAYOR ACCUSED OF TRAFFICKING AND SPYING FOR CHINA

In early 2022, residents of the rural Philippine town of Bamban, north
of Manila, gathered for the mayoral campaign rally of a plucky young
woman named Alice Leal Guo.

Supporters dressed in pink – their candidate's favourite colour –
chattered in anticipation of her arrival.

Then came the low thudding of a helicopter rotor, prompting cheers
from the crowd. Sitting in the cockpit, Guo – in a pink shirt and a
pilot's headset – flashed a smile, waving down at her supporters.

As the helicopter touched down, the crowd broke into a chant: "A-lice
Guo! A-lice Guo!"

At 31, Guo's star was rising: with promises of generous subsidies and
economic development, all delivered in her signature brassy, upbeat
tone, she had galvanised a following in the town which would see her
become its first female mayor.

But few of those cheering could have predicted that less than three
years later, Guo would be behind bars, facing charges of human
trafficking and allegations that she was a Chinese spy.

Her downfall began with a police raid that uncovered a compound where
a giant scam operation was being run from just behind her office. But
as the authorities delved deeper, and Guo struggled to answer basic
queries about her past, a perplexing question emerged: who really is
Alice Guo?

THE MAYOR EVERYONE SEEMED TO LOVE

Guo says she came to local politics from the pig-farming business,
having managed her family's commercial piggery for several years.

The career change would have required deep pockets – and when
quizzed about her campaign finances much later, Guo said it was
friends and acquaintances in the pig-farming business who had
supported her mayoral bid.

But Guo also had connections to a number of wealthy Chinese
businesspeople. Little is known about them, but some have subsequently
been convicted of money-laundering, and now also face charges of human
trafficking alongside Guo.

Her campaign focused on her sunny persona. On stage at one event, Guo
told her audience: "For our team, rule number one is: Do no harm! No
harm is allowed, we should just spread love, love, love!"

Such cheerful platitudes would carry a taint of irony, in retrospect,
when authorities exposed the harm and suffering they alleged had been
inflicted under Guo's watch.

But upon taking office in June 2022, she brought the youthful,
bright-eyed energy of her campaign into Bamban Municipal Hall,
painting it pink and decorating the outside of the building with
flowers.

"Alice was beautiful, she was kind and she was helpful to other
women," said Priscilla May Aban, 31, who runs a vegetable stall in the
town. She told the BBC that she had voted for Guo precisely because
she was a woman, adding that as mayor, Guo had arranged cleaning jobs
for women of the town.

Guo was widely regarded as a caring and empathetic leader, judging by
conversations the BBC had with several residents of Bamban. Miah
Mejia, the daughter of one of Alice's political allies, claimed that
she had given a free scholarship to every local household. Another
interviewee told us he hadn't received a college scholarship but had
been given a cash subsidy for his school fees.

An emotional Francisco Flores, 75, said, "She's helped a lot of poor
people here in Bamban, giving medicines and the way she is with
people, you'd never see a problem."

He proudly mentioned the arrival of a McDonald's and a branch of the
Philippine fast-food chain Jollibee during Guo's tenure.

Online, pro-Guo social media accounts portrayed her as a progressive
young mayor presiding over a pink-tinted wonderland of parades,
buffalo races and concerts.

A year-and-half into her mayoralty, however, this carefully crafted
image began to crumble.

INSIDE BAMBAN'S UNDERBELLY

In February 2024, Philippine police received a report about a
Vietnamese national who had escaped from the captivity of Zun Yuan
Technology Incorporated, a company operating out of a walled compound
in Bamban.

On the evening of 12 March, police officers and soldiers gathered
nearby to plan a raid on the site, located just a minute's walk from
Guo's office in the Municipal Hall.

One officer who was there, Marvin de la Paz of the Presidential
Anti-Organized Crime Commission (PAOCC), told the BBC that around
midnight, police informants sent word that people were leaving the
compound in buses.

Suspecting that their plans for a raid had been leaked, Mr de la Paz
and his colleagues raced straight for the compound. On the way, they
saw people fleeing in the other direction, and some officers in the
convoy had to peel off and chase them down. When they arrived at the
site, they found one of the largest scam hubs ever uncovered in the
Philippines, containing 36 buildings and spanning almost 20 acres.

"We were amazed," Mr de la Paz said, "That was our first time seeing
such a grandiose entrance [to a scam compound]... Somehow you feel
like you're small in this compound."

It later emerged that the compound was built on land which Guo had
previously owned – and that, as mayor, she had granted Zun Yuan a
business permit. Her name also appeared on an electricity bill found
at the site.

Alice Guo's lawyers did not respond to the BBC's request for comment.

Zun Yuan was purportedly an online gambling and entertainment company,
which held a Philippine Offshore Gaming Operator (Pogo) licence –
accreditation that previously allowed such entities to operate legally
in the Philippines.

A relaxation in gambling regulations under ex-President Rodrigo
Duterte in 2017 led to a surge of Pogo-driven business activity. But
many scam syndicates also found Pogo licences useful for masking their
criminal operations – and PAOCC told the BBC they found evidence
that Zun Yuan was running "pig-butchering" scams from its office in
the compound.

Pig-butchering is a con where scammers take time to build trust with
victims by posing as lovers or prospective business partners, then
trick them into investing their money into fraudulent schemes.

When shown around the compound by PAOCC officers earlier this month,
the BBC found, in a deserted employee dormitory, training scripts on
how to scam targets.

"I want to create my own financial empire," a scripted character – a
female crypto expert at an international bank - says to her target,
before flattering him and encouraging him to share his dreams. She is
told to put her target on hold while pretending to "cash in on a
trade" - only to declare, moments later, that she had made a killing.
She then asks whether he himself knows how to trade, setting him up
for the transfer of money that would soon follow.

This is just one of the many ways in which these compounds swindle
billions of dollars around the world. Typically run by Chinese
organised crime groups across South East Asia, they are staffed by a
mixture of willing employees and trafficked victims who are forced to
scam.

According to de la Paz, he and his colleagues found more than 300
foreign nationals in the Bamban compound, many of them working there
against their will.

Punishments for disobedient or underperforming workers ranged from
beatings to the banal: the BBC was shown a notebook from the compound,
in which a worker had copied out the phrase, "I will meet my targets
tomorrow", hundreds of times in Chinese.

Enclosed by walls topped with barbed wire, the workers' area of the
compound was its own self-contained world, featuring a basketball
court, supermarket and restaurants. Employees lived in rooms of six,
each with a balcony equipped with a toilet and shower.

Their bosses meanwhile lived in a separate gated enclave, says de la
Paz, who showed the BBC one of the villas there.

A marble-clad living room featured a high-end entertainment system,
security monitor and ornate hardwood furniture. Behind the house was a
swimming pool, beside which was a staircase that led down into what
were supposedly escape tunnels, now flooded with water.

By the time security forces stormed the Bamban compound on the evening
of 12 March 2024, some of these scam bosses had already eluded
capture.

But the raid signalled a shift in the political climate.

In June 2022, just as Guo was being sworn in as mayor, Rodrigo
Duterte's presidential term had ended.

His successor, Ferdinand Marcos Jr, soon began facing calls for a ban
on Pogo businesses. Many across Philippine society sounded the alarm
about the criminality that often lurked within, despite the millions
they brought in as revenue. Their biggest customers were rich Chinese,
which led to concerns about foreign influence as Marcos, unlike his
predecessor, courted Washington over Beijing.

When the raid in Bamban happened, it exposed a dark underbelly of the
Philippines – and the two worlds of Alice Guo – the pink office
from where she had sought a political career and the scam compound,
which suggested far murkier ambitions – collapsed in on one another.

'AMNESIA GIRL'

Guo had been a relatively unknown name in the Philippines until last
May when she was called to appear before the Senate to explain her
links to the scam compound.

Almost overnight, she became a meme. When she told senators she had
grown up on a family farm, it brought swift ridicule from Filipinos
who said she was too glamorous for the countryside. She became
notorious for her inconsistent, vague comments, as well as her claims
to have forgotten basic details of her early life, leading social
media to nickname her "my amnesia girl".

Guo said she'd had a secluded childhood as the child of a Chinese
father and Filipino mother – but could not remember where in the
Philippines her family home had been.

At one point, a senator said to her: "Please mayor, a little more
candour than you have shown so far in answering some of the important
questions."

She told sceptical senators that she had sold her stake in the land
before becoming mayor, and that the issuance of a business permit to
Zun Yuan had been a mere administrative measure.

Suspicion mounted when, during the hearings, a court in Singapore
convicted two of Guo's Chinese former business partners in the
Philippines of money-laundering.

Then, last July, despite the intense public interest in her case, Guo
managed to slip through the travel restrictions imposed on her and
escape to Indonesia. A few months later, she was re-arrested and
returned to the Philippines.

It was also in July that Philippine investigators made a breakthrough.
Guo's fingerprints were found to match those on file for a girl from
China named Guo Hua Ping, who had arrived in the Philippines alongside
her mother, also Chinese, in the early 2000s.

This revelation sparked another line of inquiry in the Senate: the
idea that Guo might be a spy, exercising influence or gathering
intelligence for the Chinese state. The idea spread quickly among the
watching public, dominating public discussion of the case.

Jaye Bekema - a senior officer on the staff of Risa Hontiveros, one of
the senators who probed potential links between scam syndicates and
Chinese intelligence - says the possibility that Guo was a spy
warranted an investigation.

"I think there should be some clarity as to what a spy means," Ms
Bekema said, while stressing that there is no conclusive proof of Guo
being a spy.

"I am more likely to believe that she didn't plan to be a spy, but
that she was tapped to be one [by the Chinese government] because of
her criminal connections and her influence on local politics and the
local government."

In many ways, Guo had become a victim of her own success. The career
she chose and the limelight she worked hard to attract meant that she
was fully exposed to public scrutiny when China-Philippines relations
soured under Marcos.

As political rhetoric escalated and tensions between the two countries
spiralled, not least of all in the South China Sea, the young mayor
found herself in the crosshairs of espionage accusations.

Others, however, are more sceptical of the allegation. The Chinese
state and Guo would have made strange bedfellows, according to
Teresita Ang See, a civic leader in the Chinese-Filipino community.

"What can she spy on in a place like [Bamban]? It's in central Luzon,
it's not near any of the sensitive establishments. Why use her? She's
very visible, she flaunts her lifestyle. The last person you would use
as a spy would be a person like Alice Guo," says Ang See.

THE POGO PROBLEM

But those who led the questioning against Guo, such as Senator Sherwin
Gatchalian, say that it's more complicated than that.

"Transnational criminals working around the region know how to tap
into... I'll call it local talent to penetrate our society, whether
through politics or business," he explains.

Either way, Guo's case shed light on the Philippine state's
vulnerability to being corrupted and co-opted by criminal groups
abusing Pogo licences.

In mid-2024, President Marcos declared a blanket ban on all Pogos,
citing their widespread abuse by organised crime.

Gatchalian says that the investigation into Alice Guo helped drive
this change.

"Because of it, there was a groundswell of people really clamouring
for a ban," he tells the BBC. "And that's when the president
officially banned Pogos."

Since then, Philippine police have raided scores of scam hubs across
the country. But given how influential the syndicates have become,
there are concerns that leaks within the security forces and
government institutions are allowing criminals to evade capture,
according to Mr de la Paz.

Ms Bekema says she feels certain that some candidates in the upcoming
national elections are still being financed with Pogo money, while Ang
See says that serving police officers have been found working for the
criminal syndicates.

In Bamban, concerns about state infiltration seem far from people's
minds.

The streets are decked with brightly-coloured campaign posters for the
upcoming municipal elections. The Municipal Hall has been whitewashed,
and the flowers have been removed.

Guo is currently on trial in six separate cases, potentially facing
decades in prison, and has been barred from running for public office
again. She has pleaded not guilty to human trafficking charges.

Yet many still treasure the memory of their embattled ex-mayor.

One of those currently standing for Bamban councillor is Miah Mejia's
father, Fortunato, a garrulous 69-year-old, who also ran in 2022 as a
member of Alice's party, although he lost. He even featured in one of
her publicity videos at the time.

He says that the people of Bamban had taken a chance by electing Guo,
but that she had good connections to Chinese investors and had
delivered on all her promises to the townspeople.

He is also indifferent to the Senate's evidence that Guo was not a
Filipino.

"That's what they've been showing, but we still don't believe it
because we don't care whether she's Filipino or not," he says. "What's
important is whether or not she helps us."

Mr Mejia is adamant that the Alice Guo he knew would not have been
involved in human trafficking.

"Never, ever would she do something like that," he says, flatly. "I
know she has a heart. She fears the Lord."

_Additional reporting by Harry Atteshlis and Jay Behrouzi_

_Who is Alice Guo? Listen to the radio documentary on Assignment _here
