FORMER PUTIN-APPOINTED GOVERNOR ON TRIAL FOR BREACHING UK SANCTIONS

A man who President Vladimir Putin appointed as the Governor of
Sevastopol after Crimea was illegally annexed by Russia has gone on
trial accused of breaching UK financial sanctions against him.

Dmitrii Ovsiannikov is accused of receiving more than £75,000 from
his wife Ekaterina Ovsiannikova and a new Mercedes Benz SUV from his
brother Alexei Owsjanikow.

Between them, the three defendants at Southwark Crown Court face 10
charges of breaching the sanctions, and two charges of money
laundering. They deny all the charges.

Dmitrii held a senior position in Crimea for three years and the court
heard he was also Russia's Deputy Minister for Industry and Trade.

Two years after Russia annexed Crimea in 2014, President Vladimir
Putin appointed Dmitrii Ovsiannikov as acting governor of the
"strategically significant" city of Sevastopol in Crimea, the jury
were told.

In 2017, elections were held there for the position of governor and Mr
Ovsiannikov won.

Paul Jarvis, for the prosecution, said he "was an important political
figure within the Russian Federation" though Dmitrii Ovsiannikov later
resigned from the position in July 2019.

As a result of his senior job in illegally annexed Crimea, the EU
imposed financial sanctions on Mr Ovsiannikov saying that among other
things he had "called for Sevastopol to become the southern capital of
the Russian Federation."

When the UK left the EU, the UK imposed financial sanctions on him
too. He later challenged the EU sanctions and had them lifted, but the
UK sanctions still apply.

They are called the Russia (Sanctions) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019. The
regulations make it a criminal offence to try to get round the
sanctions.

The trial is the first criminal case involving the breach of the
Russia Regulations.

In August 2022, Dmitrii Ovsiannikov travelled to Turkey from Russia
and applied for a British passport.

Despite the fact that the UK sanctions still applied, the jury heard
that he was granted a passport in January 2023, which he was entitled
to because his father was born in the UK.

Mr Jarvis said: "The father of Dmitrii and Alexei had been born in
Bradford, United Kingdom, in 1950. Their mother was Russian. Dmitrii
and Alexei hold British passports by virtue of their father being a
British citizen."

Dmitrii Ovsiannikov then arrived in Britain on 1 February 2023, moving
into his brother's house in Clapham, where his wife and two younger
children were already living and attending private school.

On 6 February, Dmitrii Ovsiannikov applied for a Halifax bank account,
saying on the form that he was single, but also saying that he was
living in Clapham with his wife.

Over the next two and a half weeks Ekaterina Ovsiannikova transferred
£76,000 into her husband's account allowing him to put down a deposit
on a Mercedes Benz GLC 300 SUV.

However, the bank later realised he was on the UK sanctions list and
froze the account.

After this, he went back to the dealership and recovered his deposit.
His brother Alexei Owsjanikow bought the car instead, paying more than
£54,000 the prosecution said.

The prosecution say that when Mr Ovsiannikov's wife sent him the
£76,000 and his brother bought the car they were in breach of the
Russia Regulations.

Mr Jarvis told the jury that "they maintain that they either did not
know that Dmitrii was a designated person or they did not realise that
as a designated person he was not permitted to receive that type of
help".

He also added that Dmitrii Ovsiannikov must have known he was subject
to UK sanctions, because on 7 February 2023 he was applying for them
to be lifted and had included his unique ID number and group ID number
from his sanctions listing on the form.

Speaking to the jury, Mr Jarvis said that this showed that Mr
Ovsiannikov was aware of the sanctions "and he must have made his
nearest and dearest aware of that too".

In January 2024 all three defendants were arrested and interviewed by
police.

Four months later, Alexei Owsjanikow paid more than £40,000 in school
fees for his brother's two youngest children who were at the Royal
Russell School in Croydon - also a breach of the sanctions.

Paul Jarvis told the jury that in a police interview Alexei accepted
that he had paid the school fees, but he maintained that the payments
did not amount to a breach of the Russian Regulations because he
believed that Ekaterina was solely responsible for those fees and not
Dmitrii.

The trial is expected to continue at Southwark Crown Court for three
weeks.
