POLITICAL FREE FALL: TURKEY FACES PROTESTS, INVESTOR FLIGHT AFTER
OPPOSITION LEADER'S ARREST

Turkish MPs, mayors, party members, members of different political
parties, representatives of non-governmental organizations and
citizens protest against the detention warrant of the Istanbul
Metropolitan Municipality (IBB) Mayor Ekrem Imamoglu, Beylikduzu Mayor
Murat Calik and Sisli Mayor Resul Emrah Sahan, at the CHP Headquarters
in Ankara, Turkey on March 19, 2025.
Evrim Aydin | Anadolu | Getty Images

Turkey's embattled economy is set to endure more turbulence and
investor flight as protests erupted against a slew of highly
controversial arrests carried out by the government of President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan. 

The demonstrations are in response to the arrest of Istanbul mayor
Ekrem Imamoglu, a leading opponent of Erdogan, just days before he was
expected to be nominated as his party's candidate for the
presidency. 

Turkish markets sank the most in the world on Wednesday after news of
Imamoglu's detainment broke, with the lira hitting a record low
against the dollar. That led Turkey's central bank to reportedly sell
a record amount of foreign currency – nearly $10 billion, according
to bankers' calculations cited by Reuters – to prop up the
beleaguered currency, which is down 15% on the dollar in the last year
and down 83% over the past five years.

Imamoglu, who won the mayorship of Turkey's most populous city in
April of 2024, was arrested on charges including terrorism and
organized crime, which he and his supporters reject. Prosecutors also
issued warrants for 100 other people including journalists, business
people and members of Imamoglu's Republican People's Party (CHP),
which is Turkey's main opposition group. CHP leaders are calling the
arrest a "coup."

The Istanbul governor's office has imposed bans on protests as well as
metro and road closures, while social media and internet access in the
country remains severely restricted. In response, demonstrators have
gathered at city barricades and university campuses to express their
anger. 

TOPSHOT - Istanbul's newly re-elected mayor Ekrem Imamoglu waves as
opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) supporters celebrate
outside the main municipality building following municipal elections
across Turkey on March 31, 2024. Imamoglu's second victory in an
Istanbul city election cemented his standing as Turkey's top
opposition leader in a new blow to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and
his ruling party.
Yasin Akgul | Afp | Getty Images

CNBC has contacted Turkey's Interior Ministry for comment. Government
officials deny that the arrests are politically motivated and insist
that the courts operate independently.

In a Google-translated post on the X social media platform on
Thursday, Turkish Interior Minister Ali Yerlikaya said that
authorities had detained 37 people for social media posts that it
deemed "provocative" and fell under the classification of "incitement
to commit a crime," according to a Google translation of the post.

The popular 53-year-old mayor, who won his position by a landslide in
spring 2024 local elections, was seen as Erdogan's most serious rival
for the Turkish presidency. The CHP was set to hold a primary election
on March 23, during which Imamoglu was widely expected to emerge as
the group's presidential candidate. 

Critics of the arrests say it is the clearest violation of democracy
yet by Erdogan's government.

"Turkey has already been in decline, but this is a political
freefall," Arda Tunca, an independent economist and consultant based
in Istanbul, told CNBC. "Today is history and a new dimension in
Turkey's breakaway from democracy."

RISK TO MARKETS AND INVESTMENT FLOWS

Worries over stability and economic security in Turkey could damage
financial inflows at a time when investor confidence in the country is
already shaky – and after the nation's monetary policymakers have
spent nearly two years working to turn Turkey's inflation situation
around, economists warn.

"Rule of law concerns will though persist and this will likely damage
longer term foreign direct investment flows – which are already low
– unless the AKP administration is able to produce a compelling case
against Imamoglu," Timothy Ash, emerging markets strategist at BlueBay
Asset Management, wrote in a note Wednesday.

Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan delivers a national statement at the
World Climate Action Summit during the United Nations Climate Change
Conference (COP28) in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, December 1, 2023. 
Thaier Al-sudani | Reuters

Inflation in Turkey remains high – most recently hitting 39.05% in
February – and is a key sticking point that the CHP planned to run
on in its campaign against Erdogan. Continued investor selling of the
lira could trigger deeper inflation, forcing the Turkish central bank
to raise interest rates, which are currently at an eye-watering 42.5%.

"The development will knock investor confidence and the lira, and this
will drive inflation back up," George Dyson, a senior analyst and
Turkey specialist at Control Risks, told CNBC. Still, Dyson and other
analysts don't foresee the central bank abandoning economic orthodoxy
and cutting rates. Rather, they hold there may be new rate hikes, if
the lira's weakness worsens, as the bank's laser focus has been on
combating inflation. 

TURKEY 'FEELS SECURE GEOPOLITICALLY'

Turkey's next presidential election is set to take place in 2028, but
parliament has been expected to call for an early vote, when timing
would favor Imamoglu — who according to recent opinion polls would
handily defeat Erdogan. 

"Polls presented to Erdogan were likely showing that, even with his
incumbency advantages and complete control of institutions & media,
Imamoglu was — still — defeating him — by wide margins — in a
presidential vote," Soner Cagaptay, a Turkish historian and senior
fellow at the Washington Institute, wrote in a post on the X social
media platform. 

"Which is why Erdogan has opted for the nuclear option [against]
Imamoglu."

Recent geopolitical developments, however, have strengthened Erdogan's
hand when it comes to facing international consequences. The return of
U.S. President Donald Trump to the White House has emboldened leaders
in other countries to flaunt democratic norms, some political analysts
argue. 

"One plausible explanation for why they're doing this now so far out
from the elections is that the Turkish government feels secure
geopolitically," Dyson said. "The U.S. is signaling it won't mind
these kinds of actions and the EU needs Turkey on Ukraine and on
Syria, and so the Turkish government takes advantage of the moment
when they expect minimal international backlash."

