ELON MUSK TO VISIT THE PENTAGON TO DISCUSS CHINA

President Donald Trump and Elon Musk (R) speak before departing the
White House on his way to his South Florida home in Mar-a-Lago in
Florida on March 14, 2025. 
Roberto Schmidt | Afp | Getty Images

WASHINGTON — Tech billionaire and Trump adviser Elon Musk is
scheduled to visit the Pentagon on Friday for a briefing that will
include a discussion on China, according to two defense officials. 

The briefing will be unclassified, the officials said.

The New York Times reported Thursday night that Musk would be
briefed on the U.S. military's plans for any potential war with China,
citing two U.S. officials. One official also confirmed that the
briefing would be focused on China, and another only confirmed that
Musk would be at the Pentagon on Friday, according to the Times'
report.

The defense officials whom NBC News contacted could not confirm the
Times' reporting on Musk being briefed on plans for any potential war
with China, known as the operational plan or O plan.

The decision to brief Musk on China would mark a notable expansion of
his role in the Trump administration and potentially his access to the
nation's closely guarded secrets. Musk, who Trump has charged with
overseeing a government cost-cutting initiative known as the
Department of Government Efficiency, could also have conflicts of
interest as Musk's own products and businesses are used by the federal
government, including Starlink and SpaceX, which contracts with the
Defense Department.

MORE FROM NBC NEWS:

	* Confusion reigns for thousands of reinstated federal workers  
	* Musk's huge role in the GOP is still growing 
	* Democrats face demands to step up their opposition to Trump at
fiery town halls 

Trump denied in a post on Truth Social late Thursday night that the
briefing Musk was set to receive Friday would discuss China.

Trump said the Times reported "incorrectly, that Elon Musk is going to
the Pentagon tomorrow to be briefed on any potential 'war with China.'
How ridiculous?" China will not even be mentioned or discussed. How
disgraceful it is that the discredited media can make up such lies.
Anyway, the story is completely untrue!!!"

Pentagon spokesman Sean Parnell also called the Times' reporting "100%
Fake News" in a post on X. "Just brazenly & maliciously wrong. Elon
Musk is a patriot. We are proud to have him at the Pentagon."

