SOUTH KOREA OPPOSITION CLEARS HURDLE FOR PRESIDENCY AFTER WINNING
LEGAL APPEAL

Lee Jae-myung, leader of South Korea's main opposition Democratic
Party, arrives to court in Seoul on March 26, 2025. 
Kim Hong-ji | Afp | Getty Images

A South Korean appeals court reversed on Wednesday a lower court's
ruling and found main opposition leader Lee Jae-myung not guilty of
violating the election law, removing a barrier that could have blocked
him from running for president.

Following the ruling, Lee said the decision by the Seoul High Court
completely vindicated him and proved the case was politically
motivated.

"It is truly outrageous that all this energy and national resources
were spent for what is an obvious outcome," he said.

Lee was handed a one-year prison term suspended for two years by the
Seoul Central District Court last year, a penalty that if it had
been upheld would have jeopardized his bid to run in the next
presidential election.

The appeals court reversed the earlier ruling that had found Lee
guilty of making a false claim during a parliamentary audit in 2021
while running as a presidential candidate about a land development
project in Seongnam where he served as mayor.

The court cases have shone a spotlight on Lee since opinion polls show
he is the frontrunner to replace President Yoon Suk yeol if the
embattled leader's impeachment is upheld.

South Korea will hold a snap election within 60 days if the
Constitutional Court upholds the impeachment of Yoon over his
short-lived declaration of martial law in December.

The leader of the main opposition Democratic Party is regarded as by
far the top contender for the next presidential election but
faces legal challenges.

It was unclear if the prosecution would decide to appeal Wednesday's
court decision at the Supreme Court.

In addition to the election law violation case, he also faces several
other trials on matters ranging from bribery to charges mostly linked
to a $1-billion property development scandal.

In South Korea, if lawmakers are convicted of violating the
election law and given a fine of one million won ($681.92) or more
or even a suspended sentence and the conviction becomes
finalized, they are barred from running for elections for at least
five years and stripped of their parliament seat.

Lee, 61, ran against Yoon in the 2022 presidential election and lost
by the slimmest margin in history.

In 2024, he survived a knife attack when he was stabbed in the neck by
a man during an event and underwent surgery.

