UK FORGES AHEAD WITH BILLIONS IN WELFARE SPENDING CUTS AS GROWTH
FORECAST HALVED

Britain's Finance Minister Rachel Reeves on Wednesday announced
billions of pounds worth of spending cuts as she looked to plug a
budget shortfall amid stalling growth and higher borrowing costs since
her first fiscal plan, released last fall.

"The responsible choice is to reduce our levels of debt and borrowing
in the years ahead so we can spend more on the priorities of working
people," Reeves said, addressing lawmakers in Parliament.

Reeves said welfare cuts already set out last week are estimated to
save £4.8 billion in the welfare budget, and would boost measures to
get people back into work. She also laid out plans to bring forward
investment spending and measures to crackdown on tax avoidance and
evasion to raise revenues for the Treasury.

Warning that "we are living in an uncertain world," Reeves said
defense spending would increase to 2.5% of GDP with reductions in
overseas aid helping to fund the boost. She also said the Labour
government's planning reforms would "lead to housebuilding reaching a
forty year high" and would help grow the economy.

The finance minister had already vowed to stick to her self-imposed
"fiscal rules" set out in the "Autumn Budget" last October: to ensure
that day-to-day spending is met by tax revenues and that public debt
is falling as a share of economic output by 2029-30.

On Wednesday, she reiterated her position that these rules were
"non-negotiable" and that her new policy announcements meant she would
meet the so-called "stability" and "investment" rules two years early.

The U.K.'s finance minister's Spring Statement was delivered alongside
the latest economic forecasts from the Office for Budget
Responsibility (OBR), the country's independent public finances
watchdog.

The OBR, Reeves said, had downgraded the U.K.'s growth forecasts for
2025 and halved its previous 2% estimate.

"I am not satisfied with these numbers. That is why we on this side of
the house are serious about taking the action needed to grow our
economy," she said, responding to the OBR's growth downgrade.

She added that the OBR had upgraded its growth forecast for 2026 "and
every single year thereafter," however, with the watchdog predicting
GDP growth of 1.9% in 2026, 1.8% in 2027, 1.7% in 2028, and 1.8% in
2029.

"By the end of the forecast, our economy is larger compared to the
OBR's forecast at the time of the Budget," she said.

Reeves concluded her speech by telling lawmakers that "the world is
changing."

"We can see that and we can feel it. A changing world demands a
government that is on the side of working people. Acting in their
interest. Acting in the national interest. Not retreating from
challenges."

Following the statement, the OBR published its economic forecasts in
which it said the chancellor had restored the Treasury's fiscal
"headroom" amid a "risky outlook."

"Before accounting for policy, higher debt interest costs and other
forecast changes left the current budget in deficit by £4 billion in
2029-30. Policy changes, including welfare reforms and day-to-day
departmental spending reductions, restore it to the £10 billion
surplus the Chancellor had in October," the OBR said.

"This remains a small margin against the risk of further shocks to
interest rates, productivity, or global trade."

'A CHANGING WORLD'

Since her initial budget was presented last October, Reeves has come
under increasing pressure to cut public spending, raise taxes further
or to bend the fiscal rules amid a rise in U.K. borrowing costs that
wiped out the fiscal headroom Reeves had within her initial budget.

The U.K. is also facing the specter of a temporary rise in the rate of
inflation, according to the Bank of England, along with continuing
economic sluggishness in recent months. U.S. President Donald Trump's
trade tariffs, seen to be inflationary, also posing a headwind for the
economy although the U.K. has not been targeted yet.  

Reeves on Wednesday noted that the OBR forecast that inflation would
"average 3.2% this year before falling rapidly to 2.1% in 2026 and
meeting the 2% target from 2027 onwards, giving families and
businesses the security that they need and providing our economy with
the stable platform it needs to grow."

The Treasury had already issued a press release Tuesday stating that
Reeves would pledge to bring about "security and national renewal" in
her Spring Statement that would, it said, be designed "to kickstart
economic growth, protect working people and keep our country safe."

Britain's Prime Minister Keir Starmer meets with Britain's Chancellor
of the Exchequer Rachel Reeves, days before the announcement on the
first budget of the new Labour government, at Downing Street on
October 28, 2024 in London, England. Starmer and Reeves are meeting
ahead of the Budget on Wednesday.
Wpa Pool | Getty Images News | Getty Images

Reeves' statement was widely expected to address the "erosion of
fiscal headroom via tighter spending control," Emily Nicol and Edward
Maling at Daiwa Capital Markets noted ahead of Reeves' address.

"At the time of October's Budget announcement, the OBR projected a
current budget surplus in FY29/30 of about £10 billion, with that
amount representing the government's so-called 'headroom' for meeting
its binding objective of a balanced current budget by that date.
Today's figures suggest that this has been more than wiped out," they
noted.

"With economic growth having recently been below the OBR's expectation
— and the OBR likely to roughly halve its 2.0%Y/Y GDP forecast for
2025 — the overshoot of public borrowing and undershoot of tax
revenues relative to the OBR's forecast might be considered in part
due to cyclical weakness which might in due course correct
automatically."

The economists warned, however, that "the increase of about 20-40
basis points in gilt yields across much of the curve since mid-October
will be considered by the OBR to be structural and will alongside
certain other slippages — in the absence of offsetting new policies
— likely have eroded the government's headroom."

SPENDING CUTS AHEAD

The erosion of the Treasury's fiscal headroom had prompted economists
and analysts to widely bank on Reeves announcing billions of pounds in
cost cuts on Wednesday.

The government had already flagged plans for £5 billion's worth of
welfare spending cuts, as well as intentions to reduce the
administrative costs of the Civil Service, which implements government
policies, by 15% by 2030.

Rachel Reeves, UK Finance Minister, speaking on CNBC's Squawk Box
outside the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland on Jan. 22,
2025.
Gerry Miller | CNBC

"The Spring Statement will see an increase in required borrowing over
the next two years due predominantly to higher interest payments. An
updated OBR forecast will require the Chancellor to make back-loaded
spending cuts of around £10 billon to retain her previous fiscal
headroom," Barclays Strategist Moyeen Islam and Chief U.K. Economist
Jack Meaning said in analysis last week.

"These savings will most likely be focused on welfare spending and
public sector headcount, and delayed until the second half of the
parliament, beyond 2027," they added.

 Get the CNBC Daily Open report in your inbox every morning and keep
up to date with the markets wherever you are. 
Subscribe 

Reeves had repeatedly commented that she would not abandon her fiscal
rules or raise taxes further for now, although economists expect more
levies could come later this year.

There was widespread consternation in the British business community
last fall when she raised the tax burden on businesses and employers
with the aim, she said, of plugging a hole in public finances and
allowing for investment in public services.

British industry leaders warned that the Treasury's fiscal plans
could weigh on investment, jobs and growth, however.

Reeves defended the tax rises as a "one-off" measure and necessary to
boost investment in public services. She has repeatedly stated that
boosting U.K. growth is her number one priority and has vowed that she
would not be loosening the fiscal rules or targets she has imposed on
her department.

