STURGEON REMAINS THE BIGGEST NAME IN SCOTTISH POLITICS

That Nicola Sturgeon should choose to stand down from Holyrood at the
next election was entirely expected.

Even if the former first minister liked to try and keep the media
guessing.

When asked a couple of weeks ago if she was going to quit as an MSP
she told journalists "you'll have to wait and see".

In reality, the chances of her staying on to sit on the backbenches
and make worthy interventions were always slim.

Having personally fronted the Scottish government's response to a
global pandemic, for instance, she would have been bored to tears.

In her early 50s, she still has time and the potential to develop a
post-politics career.

There are memoirs due to be published this summer and a string of
book-related events peppering her diary.

When she first left power, there was lots of speculation about some
kind of international job offer - until the police came calling.

The cloud that hangs over everything is the ongoing investigation into
the SNP's finances.

Prosecutors have still to decide whether or not to take any further
action with regards to her and the party's former treasurer Colin
Beattie - both having been arrested, questioned and released without
charge.

The Crown has also to decide whether or not to pursue the embezzlement
charges brought against Nicola Sturgeon's ex-husband, the SNP's former
chief executive Peter Murrell.

OPERATION BRANCHFORM

The Operation Branchform investigation, launched in summer 2021, is
now so long-running it is by no means certain it will have concluded
by the time of the 2026 election.

Whatever decisions are taken, it seems the Sturgeon/Murrell political
power couple will face the future independently of one another.

Sturgeon recently announced on behalf of them both that their marriage
had ended and that, to all intents and purposes, they had been
separated for some time.

While her decision to stand down as an MSP was obvious and much
anticipated, it still has the capacity to startle.

Nicola Sturgeon remains the biggest name in Scottish politics.

She was a player in UK politics in a way that neither of her
successors could expect to be.

That was partly drawn from her mandate - an extraordinary run of
election wins that made her leader of the third placed party at
Westminster.

That gave her a voice in debates about Brexit and offered the UK media
a political contrast with a succession of Conservative prime
ministers, including Boris Johnson.

She was also seen as a persistent threat to the continuation of the UK
state, pushing the boundaries of devolution in pursuit of her ambition
to hold another independence referendum.

In the end, neither the forces of her personality or argument were
able to bring that about.

Her strategy collapsed when the UK Supreme Court ruled that any future
vote must be agreed with the UK government.

Subsequent talk of using a UK general election as a substitute
referendum lacked credibility.

This was a significant factor in what brought her leadership to a
close, as was her focus on the politics of switching gender identity -
ironically the subject of an opposition debate at Holyrood today.

There were also the divisions in the SNP and the wider independence
movement caused by the spectacular fallout Sturgeon had with her
predecessor, Alex Salmond, when the Scottish government mishandled
harassment complaints against him.

Then there was her attempt to realign Scottish politics by forming a
power-sharing partnership with the Greens to achieve political
stability for the Scottish government.

That controversial arrangement was discontinued by her immediate
successor Humza Yousaf.

WHAT WILL BE HER LEGACY?

She was the first minister who expanded early learning and childcare
and used new welfare powers to introduce a weekly child payment unique
to Scotland - policies she would regard as significant achievements.

While opposition parties say they would maintain these benefits,
financial watchdogs warn that the extent of health and social welfare
spending in Scotland is unsustainable.

All of this is part of the Sturgeon legacy to be debated as she counts
down to her departure from the Scottish Parliament in just over a
year.

Nicola Sturgeon famously made decisions in a very tight circle and
according to one adviser her decision-making group became ever
smaller.

By the end, this source said she was operating in "a circle of one".

It was ultimately her decision to leave high office just as it is now
hers to leave frontline politics altogether.

As she has noted herself in the past, Nicola Sturgeon is a public
figure loved and loathed in almost equal measure but there can be few
who would doubt that politics will be a duller place without her
presence.
