'GERMANY IS BACK': MERZ SECURES KEY SUPPORT FOR DEBT DEAL

German Chancellor-in-waiting Friedrich Merz said on Friday he had
secured the crucial backing of the Greens for a massive increase in
state borrowing, clearing the way for the outgoing parliament to
approve it next week.

Merz's conservatives and the Social Democrats, who are in negotiations
to form a government after an election last month, had proposed a 500
billion euro fund for infrastructure and sweeping changes to borrowing
rules to bolster defence and revive growth in Europe's largest
economy.

With the Greens, they now have the two thirds majority necessary to
pass constitutional amendments, with a vote scheduled for next week.

Merz has justified the need to push the package through the outgoing
parliament after recent shifts in policy in the United States under
President Donald Trump, warning that a hostile Russia and an
unreliable U.S. could leave

the continent exposed.

"It is a clear message to our partners .. but also to the enemies of
our freedom: We are capable of defending ourselves," Merz, whose
conservatives won the election, told a news conference.

"Germany is back. Germany is making a significant contribution to the
defence of freedom and peace in Europe," he added.

News of the deal lifted euro zone government bond yields, shares and
the euro on expectation the borrowing plan would boost the wider
European economy.

Germany's benchmark DAX stock index was up almost 2%, while the mid-
and small-cap indexes rose over 3% each. The euro rose 0.5% - taking
its gains so far this month to 5%.

DEBT BRAKE 'BURIED'

Merz wants to secure the funds before a new parliament convenes on
March 25, where they risk being blocked by an expanded contingent of
far-right and far-left lawmakers.

The compromise reached with the Greens includes the allocation of 100
billion euros for the climate and economic transformation fund from
the 500 billion euros earmarked for infrastructure, he said.

It also includes a change to the constitution that would see
expenditures for defence, civil and disaster protection, intelligence
services, information security exempt from borrowing limits -
so-called 'debt brake' - if they exceed 1% of economic output.

The reforms would mark a rollback of those debt rules, imposed after
the 2008 global financial crisis but since criticised by many as
outdated and putting Germany into a fiscal straitjacket.

"With today's plan, the debt brake might not be entirely dead but
rather buried alive," said Carsten Brzeski, global head of macro at
ING.

"The only limiting fiscal rule for the German government will be the
(EU) Stability and Growth Pact. And we know from past experiences that
these rules can be soft as butter if needed."

