AFGHAN WOMEN STUDENTS FACING FORCED RETURN AFTER USAID CUTS GET
TEMPORARY REPRIEVE

REPRIEVE FOR AFGHAN WOMEN STUDENTS FACING FORCED RETURN AFTER US AID
CUTS 

More than 80 Afghan women studying in Oman on US-funded scholarships -
terminated last month due to Trump administration's sweeping cuts to
foreign aid - have received a temporary reprieve.

A US State Department spokesperson has told the BBC that funding will
continue until 30 June, 2025.

"This is great news, and we are very grateful," one student told the
BBC, speaking anonymously for fear of reprisals. "But I hope there
will be a permanent solution."

The women fled Taliban ruled Afghanistan to continue their studies
abroad, but the abrupt freeze on US Agency for International
Development (USAID) funds put them at risk of being sent back.

Since regaining power in Afghanistan nearly four years ago, the
Taliban has imposed draconian restrictions on women, including banning
them from universities.

The students in Oman were pursuing graduate and post-graduate degrees
under the Women's Scholarship Endowment (WSE), a USAID program
launched in 2018 to fund studies in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics.

On 28 February, they were informed their scholarships were ending and
that they would be sent back to Afghanistan within two weeks,
prompting "shock and tears".

"We are relieved now, but we are still deeply concerned about our
future," a student said. "If the scholarship is not renewed, we will
be left with no option but to return to Afghanistan, where we cannot
study, and our safety could be under threat as well."

The US government has not responded to the BBC's inquiries on when a
final decision will be made.

The BBC has also contacted the government of Oman to find out whether
it is seeking alternative funding.

Afghanistan's Taliban government says it has been trying to resolve
the issue of women's education, but has also defended its supreme
leader's diktats, saying they are "in accordance with Islamic Sharia
law".

It has cracked down on women protesting for education and work, with
many activists beaten, detained and threatened.

Women in Afghanistan describe themselves as "dead bodies moving
around" under the regime's policies.

Before the funding extension, a WSE staff member had told the BBC they
were urgently "searching for alternative funding sources". Calling the
situation "dangerous and devastating", the staff member warned that
the students could face persecution and forced marriages upon return
to Afghanistan.

The women, mostly in their 20s, qualified for scholarships in 2021
before the Taliban seized Afghanistan. Many continued their studies in
Afghan universities until December 2022, when the Taliban banned
higher education for women.

After 18 months in limbo, they said they fled to Pakistan last
September.

USAID then facilitated their visas to Oman, where they arrived between
October and November 2024.

The decision to slash American aid funding has come under the Trump
administration, and been implemented by Elon Musk's Department of
Government Efficiency.

_Additional reporting by Aakriti Thapar and Andrew Clarance_
